# Book of the Covenant

# Book of the Covenant 1

## Chapter 1

Ir came to pass, after our Lord rose from the dead, and appeared unto us, and was handled ® by Thomas and Matthew and John, and we were persuaded that our Master* was truly risen from the dead, that falling on our faces we blessed the Father of the new world,> God, Who hath saved us by Jesus Christ our Lord; and being held® in very great fear, we waited prostrate as babes which speak not.’ But Jesus our Lord, putting His hand on each one of us separately, lifted us up, saying, Why hath your heart thus fallen, and are ye stricken with great astonishment? Know ye not that He who sent Me can do glorious things for the salvation of them that have from the heart believed on Him? Stand not then as [men] astonished, and staring’ neither [be] slothful, Lord Jesus Christ ; the words which, after He rose from the dead, He spake to the holy Apostles. The Copto-Arabic version renders it with several variations. In Codex C. the preface is: And it came to pass after our Lord returned to life and rose from the grave on the third day and revealed Himself to His holy disciples and spake with them, they said unto Him afterwards: Tell us, O our Lord (as in chapter 2). Thesaurus Syriacus, col. 1367). fashioned [like statues]. but as the children of light} ask of My Father which is in heaven the Spirit of counsel and might,? and He will fill you with the Holy Ghost and grant you to be with Me for ever. And we returned answer, saying, Lord,* what is the Holy Ghost, and what is His power, whom Thou badest® us to ask for? And our Lord said unto us, Verily I say unto you that ye shall not be the children of the light? except by the Holy Ghost. And we returned answer to Him, and said, O our Lord, give us this [Spirit]. And immediately Jesus ° breathed on us.’ And after we had received the Holy Ghost, He said unto us, Verily® I say unto you, that ye who have been made disciples unto the kingdom of heaven, and who have believed in Me with undoubting heart, and have cleaved unto Me, shall be with Me; and all those who through you know and do the will of My Father, who keep My words and know My sufferings,® shall be made holy, and shall dwell in the habitations ! of My Father, and shall be delivered from the evil days that are about to come; and I will be with them, shewing them My ways in which they shall live.

## Chapter 2

And Peter and John answered and said unto Him :—Tell us, O our Lord, the signs of the end,!? and all the deeds which shall then be [done] by them™ who live in this world, so that we also may make [them] known to them who believe in ? Isa. xi 2. Lagarde reads : ‘‘ of glory and of perfection” (ris S6ns kal ris Tedecérynros). This is due to a recent hand in S, 7$t. John xx. 22, 88.: Verily, verily. about the end. 4C.: all the troubles which shall then be from them . Thy Name in all the nations, that those? generations may observe * [them] and live. But Jesus answered and said :— tell you some things about the end?? We answered and said, [Yea,] O our Lord; but now we desire to know the deeds which [are] the signs of the end of this world, if our Lord hath judged that this is fitting for us to know *—for us, and for those who [shall] hear.

## Chapter 3

And Jesus answered and said:—In the time when I was in the world,® I spoke unto you before I should be glorified, of signs that the end is near, thus:—that there shall be on earth famines and pestilences,’ tumults, and commotions, risings of nations against nations, and those other things whereof I have told you*® But I commanded you to watch and pray.® And now hear, ye children of the light ; for My Father who hath sent Me to His inheritance hath predetermined ” in His foreknowledge," that in the last days, out of the latest generation,” there should be vessels 18 [of grace] holy, and honoured, and elect. Wherefore I make known unto you exactly [what are] the things which are about to be, and when he shall arise,!* that Son of Perdition, the Enemy, the 1° Adversary,” and what he is like. 1M. B.: all the. 2 Or: guard against. C. reads: may be preserved. 3C.: before I suffered, tell you something concerning those that shall dwell on the earth in the latter time. 4Cf. Acts i, 7. 5S. inserts: Of the signs of the end. time of my persecution. as Pshitta. foreknowing the calamities which shall be in the last days, hath predetermined His inheritance and honoured vessels . . . Ul Lit.: foreknowing. 2 So M. B. C.; S.: generations. 16S.: and the. 17 2 Thess. ii. 4.

## Chapter 4

There shall, then, be signs when the kingdom is approaching such as these. After the famines and pestilences and tumults among the nations,! then there shall rule, and rise to power, princes who love money, who hate the truth, who kill their brethren, liars, haters of the faithful,? proud, lovers of gold, allied by relationship but not allied in counsel,® for they wish each to destroy the life of his fellow. But there shall be in their hosts great affliction, and flight,® and bloodshed.

## Chapter 5

But there shall arise also in the West a king of foreign race, a prince of great craft, godless,$ a homicide, a deceiver, a lover of gold, great at devices,? a hater of the faithful,” a persecutor44; and he shall bear rule also over barbarous nations, and shall shed much blood. At that time silver shall be despised and gold be honoured; and in every city and every country there shall be spoiling and robbery, and there shall be # spilling of blood.

## Chapter 6

Then there shall be signs in heaven. A bow shall be seen, and a horn, and lights; and noises out of season, and 1S0 S. C.; M. B.: seas (by alteration of one letter). > Lit.: thought. °SoS8. M. C.; B. omits: and flight. 7§.: Of the king of foreign origin. 9M. B.: reasoning. 10 C.: of the faith. 8.: Of the signs of heaven. The Tréves fragment begins this section (having prefixed our I. 11): But before this there shall be other signs in heaven. 4C. adds: in the heavens ; Traves fragm. similarly. 15M. B.: sounds ; 8. C. and Tréves fragm. as text. has ‘‘a sound and voice and raging of the sea,” etc. sounds and ragings of the sea? and a roaring*® of the earth.

## Chapter 7

But on the earth shall be signs; the birth® of dragons from mankind, and likewise also of wild beasts®; and young women newly wedded shall bring forth’ babes who speak perfectly ® and announce® the last times, and pray” to be put to death. And their looks shall be the looks of [men] far advanced in years ; they shall be grey-headed when they are born. Also women ” shall bear babes with four feet : some shall bear spirits only, and some’ shall bear their progeny with * unclean spirits. Others [there] shall [be who] practise divination in the womb, and shall speak with familiar spirits ®; and there shall be many other horrible signs.”

## Chapter 8

But in the assemblies,® and®° nations, and churches, there shall be many tumults, for there shall arise evil 4C.: a sound of all sorts of storms. 2 St. Luke xxi. 25, 7C.: others who being but boys take wives shall bring forth (sic) ; see Note. bring forth” (mox nubserit femina pariet !). men). (singular ; the same Syriac word in plural is ‘‘spirits’’) ; cf. Isa. xxvi. 18. only. W For monstrous births, cf. 2 Esdras v. 8. 18§,: Of disturbances and tumults of nations and shepherds (Lagarde: of disturbance and tumult, etc.). shepherds unjust slothful? avaricious, lovers of pleasures,* lovers of gains® lovers of money, talkative, boastful,° haughty, gluttonous,’ perverse, rash, given to delights, vainglorious’ opposing the ways of? the Gospel and fleeing from the strait gate® removing from themselves every humiliation and not sorrowing for My humiliation,” rejecting all the words of truth, and despising” all the ways of piety, and not mourning for their sins. Therefore’ there shall be shed abroad among the nations unbelief, hatred of the brotherhood,® wickedness, bitterness, slothfulness,® envy, hatred, strife, theft, oppression, drunkenness, debauchery,”” lasciviousness,!8 licentiousness, fornication, and all such works as are contrary to the commandments of life. For from many mourning and gentleness shall flee away, and peace and meekness, and poverty and piety, and tears,” because the shepherds heard ®° these things, and did not do them, and moreover did not shew”! My commandments, seeing that they [themselves] are examples of wickedness in the nation.” But the time shall come when some of them will deny Me, and will stir up* confusions in the earth,* and put their trust in a corruptible® king. But they who in My Name endure?’ unto the end shall be saved.28 Then they shall ordain commandments for men, [commandments] unlike the 7808. C.; M. B. omit: gluttonous. 5 xevddotos translated. [people], C. adds: for my sake. debaucheries, lasciviousnesses. *§, C.: kings; Copto-arab.: mortal kings. Cf. Ps. exlvi. 3, 4. book of commandments! in which? the Father is well pleased?; and My elect* and My holy ones shall be rejected® by them, and called among them, as it were, the polluted. Yet these are the upright ones, pure, sad, merciful, quiet, kind, always knowing Him who is among them ® at all times, and they shall be called mad for My sake, who have saved’ them. It shall come to pass also in those days that My Father shall gather together ® out of that generation the pure ones, even the pure and faithful souls, those to whom I will appear, and with whom I will make My habitation, and I will send to them the understanding ® of knowledge and of truth, and the understanding® of holiness, and they shall not cease praising’ and giving thanks to their God,! My Father who sent Me; and they shall speak the truth at all times, and they shall teach [others] whose spirit they have tried * [and have found] that they are upright 3 and worthy, as for the kingdom," and shall instruct them in knowledge and strength and prudence. And those who suffer persecution because they live in piety shall receive the reward of their praise. And it shall be in those times that all the kingdoms shall be disturbed, and all the world % also [shall see] affliction 1° and want; and all this world shall be reputed as nothing ; and all its possessions shall be destroyed 1§,: and the commandment. 3C.: precepts not according to my will, and traditions in which My Father is not well pleased. 4SoC. S.; M. B.: my men (viri). 5 Or: despised. corrupt). upright. 4C.: rightly directed in their hearts towards the kingdom. 16C.: all the kingdoms of the whole earth shall be swept together, and it shall be in want and affliction. by many [destroyers], and there shall be great scarcity of crops, and the winter shall be very severe; and the princes * shall be few in number and small, who have rule over? gold and over silver, and are rich in all those things which are in this world; and the children of this world shall hold their storerooms and barns, and shall have rule over the markets of buying and selling.® Many shall be afflicted,* and on that account shall call upon their God that they may be delivered. Blessed are they who are not [alive] at that time; and [blessed] they [also] who shall be® [alive indeed], but ® [shall] endure. For when these things shall come to pass, then soon she that travaileth is near to bring forth,’ for the® time is fulfilled.

## Chapter 9

Then shall come the Son of Perdition, the Adversary, who boasteth and exalteth himself° working many signs and miracles, that he may deceive the whole earth,” and overcome the innocent,® My holy ones. Blessed are they who endure in those days. But woe to those who are deceived.

## Chapter 10

But Syria shall be plundered, and shall weep for her sons. Cilicia shall lift wp her neck until He who judgeth her shall appear. The daughter of Babylon shall arise from the throne of her glory, that she may drink that ' wine ” which is mixed for her. Cappadocia, Lycia,!* Lycaonia shall bow down the 1C. omits: princes. 2 Tie. possess. 3 Cf. Rev. xiii, 17. 4C.: my faithful ones shall be afflicted, and so on (see Note). heaven. 48,: Of the destruction of the countries. C. omits this chapter and goes on to § 11 with ‘‘ After a little.” back, for many multitudes shall be depraved by the corruption of their wickednesses.! And then shall be opened the camps of the barbarians, for many chariots shall go forth so as to cover [the face of] the earth. In all Armenia, and in Pontus, and in Bithynia ? the young men shall fall by the sword, and the sons and the daughters shall be captives. [The sons and the daughters] of Lycaonia shall be mingled in [their] blood. Pisidia which boasteth, and trusteth in [her] riches, shall be overthrown [even] to the ground. The sword shall pass through Phoenicia, because [her inhabitants] are children of corruption. Judaea shall clothe herself with lamentation, and shall be made ready for the day of destruction, because of her uncleanness. Then shall she gather together the abomination of desolation.* The East shall be opened® by him®; also the ways shall be opened’ by him. Sword and flame [are] in his hands: he burneth with anger and fiery indignation. This is the armour of the judgment of the corruption of them that are born in the earth; the extermination of the faithful, the way® of bloodshed ®; for his way is in error and his power is to blaspheme,” and his hand for deception, his right hand in misery, and his left hand in darkness.

## Chapter 11

And these are the signs of him”: his head [is] as a fiery flame: his right eye shot with blood, his left [eye] blueblack, and he “ hath two pupils. His eyelashes * are white ; 1§8.: wickedness. 3§.: islands; M. B. as text. 4St. Matt. xxiv. 15. 11§,:; Of the signs of the appearance and likeness of the Devil, what they are like. C. begins: Concerning the Son of Perdition he saith. burneth. Tréves fragm. adds: his eyes are those of a cat (fellini, for felini). and? his lower lip is large; but his right thigh slender ;? his feet broad ; his great toe is bruised‘ and flat. This is the sickle of desolation.5

## Chapter 12

Therefore I say unto you, [ye] children of the light, that the time is at hand, and the harvest is ripe® that sinners should be harvested in judgment. And to many the Judge shall arise as one who is kind,’ and shall impute to them their own works.’ But when He® shall be at hand, a sign shall be given to? the elect, who keep the law of My Father.

## Chapter 13

Then ® those who fear My words, and do them in truth and with a faithful mind,” shall watch and pray ® without ceasing,!§ reckoning continual supplication as a work, in nothing wandering or going about!” in this world, and in nothing anxious, but 18 with an austere 1 soul and a mind that doubteth not,” daily taking on them the cross,”4 to do the will of My Apocryphal Apocalypse of John, Antichrist has the legs of a cock (James, Apoc. Anecd. 156, 187). 5M. B. omit thisclause. See Note for other MSS. is improbable. the day of trial. In the day of judgment, they shall be justified by their works. for the Treves fragm. 11B.: laws; C.: laws and precepts. 12§.,: Of the approach of the time of judgment. them who fear My words and fulfil them in truth that they pray . . . 18M. B.: also not. ! §. margin: contrite. with a manly soul and unhesitating mind. Father which is in heaven, with a meek heart. For He who is anxious about them that trust in the truth, and careth for them, is the Lord; and He sendeth to them those things which are right and fitting *—those things which He knoweth, and by the hands of them whom He knoweth.

## Chapter 14

I have told you these things, therefore, that wherever ye go, ye may test the souls that are holy,? and tell them those things which are fitting and right, and those things which are about to be,* and all those things which, before I was > glorified,® I gave you in commandment,’ so that believing [them] they may truly live® From henceforth shall be® the beginning of travail,’® and the mystery of destruction." Turning therefore to the Church,” setting right, duly ordering, and arranging, and doing all things in uprightness and holiness, speak to every man as is helpful to him, so that your Father which is in heaven may be glorified1® Be ye wise, that ye may persuade those who are in captivity to error,® and those who are sunk in ignorance, that coming to the knowledge of! God, and living piously and purely, they may praise My Father and your God.}8

## Chapter 15

Now after Jesus had spoken these words, Peter and John ®(C.: while they believe in you they may live purely and holily. of Perdition is ended without diminution. #2. B.: Churches. 13 §. here breaks off, and resumes in § 31. Churches, and ordain for (impress upon) them the offices which suit each. God who is your God. and Thomas and Matthew and Andrew and Matthias (?) and the rest said: O our Lord, truly Thou hast spoken to us now also words of warning and of truth, and though we are not worthy Thou hast bestowed upon us many things, and hast granted also to those of future generations who are worthy, to know Thy words and to flee from the snares of the Evil One. But, O our Lord, we beseech Thee, make Thy perfect light to shine upon us, and upon those who are foreordained and separated to be Thine. Because! that we have many times asked Thee, we pray Thee teach us of what sort he ought to be who standeth at the head of the Church, or with what rule he should raise up and order the Church. For it is urgent that when we are sent to the nations to preach the salvation which is from Thee, it should not escape us as to how it is fitting to arrange the mysteries of the Church. Therefore from Thy mouth,? O our Saviour and Perfecter, we desire to learn without omission how the Chief of the holy things ought to please Thee, and [likewise] all those who minister in Thy Church.

## Chapter 16

Then Martha and Mary, and Salome, who were with us,‘ answered and said :—Yea, O our Lord, teach us to know what we ought to do, that our souls may live unto Thee. Then Jesus answered and said unto them: I will that, persevering in supplication,’ ye should always serve My Gospel, and be examples of ® holiness, for the salvation of those who trust patiently’ in Me; and in all things be figures of the kingdom of heaven.

## Chapter 17

But to us also Jesus said:—Because that ye also have asked Me concerning the rule ecclesiastical, I deliver and make known to you how ye ought to order and command ? Copto-arab. abbreviates from here to the end of the chapter. him who standeth at the head of the Church, and to keep the perfect and just and most excellent rule, in which My Father who hath sent Me is well pleased. Verily I say unto you, that he who knoweth the power of this commandment and of this testament, and doeth according to those things which are written therein, shall be made like! unto the angels who praise My Father? and shall be holy unto God. But My Father is mediator? and all His host, that if their sins are as the sand of the sea[shore] which cannot be numbered,* and any of them, understanding these words, shall do them, these sins shall be forgiven him, and he shall live in Me.

## Chapter 18

But because in the midst of the assembly of the people [there are], more and more, many carnal desires, and the labourers are feeble® and few, only My perfect labourers shall know the multitude of My words, all also which at times® I spake to you in private before I should suffer, and which ye know; ye both have them and understand them. For My mysteries are given to those who are Mine, with whom I shall rejoice and be glad with My Father. When they shall be loosed from [this] life they shall come to Me. But these remaining words, determining and appointing them, speak ye in the Churches. But from the day that My faithful ones also have the desire to know, that they may do the things of My Father, what[soever is] in this My testament, I will be with them, and will be praised among them, and I will make My habitation with them, by power informing them of the will of My Father. See that ye give not My holy things to the dogs, and cast not pearls before swine,’ as I have often commanded you. 10Qr: shall be like. There is a reminiscence of St. Luke xx. 36 (?). object). Give not My holy things! to defiled and wicked men who do not bear My cross, and are not subject [to Me]; and My commandments shall be for derision among them. And it? shall be to him that is embittered # and doeth them not, but giveth My words without profit, for the destruction of their souls. But it* shall be spoken and given to those who are firm and fixed, and do not fall away, who keep> My commandments and this tradition, [to the end] that they, keeping these [things], may abide holy and upright and strong in Me, fleeing from the downfall of iniquity and the death of sin; the Holy Ghost [also] bestowing upon them His grace, that they may believe uprightly,® that they may in the Spirit spiritually know the things of the Spirit,’ and in hope® endure labour, and in joy serve My Gospel,’ and bear the reproach of My cross, not doubting but [rather] glorying®; for verily I say unto you, that such as these [men] and such as these [women] shall, after death, dwell ° in the third order of My Father who hath sent Me.

## Chapter 19

T tell you therefore how the sanctuary? ought to be; then I will make known the holy rule of the priests of the Church. Let the church then be thus: let it have three entrances as a type of the Trinity. Let the diaconicum * be on the right of the right hand entrance, that the eucharists,'* or offerings which are offered, may be seen. Let there be a fore-court, with a portico % going round, to the diaconicum. %” Perhaps we should read: ‘‘after the rest (or quiet) of My Father who hath sent Me, shall dwell . . .” See Note. M4 eixapioriat. The Greek is transliterated into Syriac from accus. pl. } rod transliterated. See Note. Then within the fore-court let there be a place [to serve] for a baptistery, its length twenty-one cubits as a general ? type of the prophets, and its width twelve cubits as a type of those who have been determined to preach the Gospel,’ with one entrance and three exits. Let the Church have a house of the catechumens, which shall be also the house of the exorcists. Let it not be detached from the Church, but so that those who enter and are in it may hear the lections* and spiritual hymns of praise and psalms.> Let there be a throne by the altar ®; on the right and on the left [let there be] the places of the presbyters, so that on the right may sit those who are more exalted and honoured, and those who labour in the word’; but those who are of middle age® on the left hand. But that place where the throne is, let it® be raised three steps, for there the altar ought to be. Let that house have two porches, on the right and on the left, for men and for women. Let all the places be lighted, both for a type, and also for reading. Let the altar have a veil of pure linen, for it is without spot. Also the baptistery likewise, let it be under a veil. Let a place be built as for commemoration, so that the priest and chief deacon sitting with the readers may write the names of those who offer the oblations, or of those for whom they have offered [them], so that when the holy things are offered by the bishop, the reader or chief deacon may name them by way of commemoration, which the priests’ and ‘*place” which is fem. W B.: priest. people offer for them with supplication. For there is thistype also in heaven.? Let the place of the. presbyters be within the veil, beside that place of commemoration. Let the house of the offering and the treasury be quite ” beside the diaconicum. But let the place of the lection 3 be a little outside the altar. Let the house of the bishop be beside that place which is called the fore-court. Also that of those widows who are called “those that sit in front.” Also let that of the presbyters and deacons be behind the baptistery.* _Let the deaconesses abide beside the door of the Lord’s house. Let the Church have a house for entertaining near by, where the chief deacon shall entertain strangers.

## Chapter 20

Now after the house is [built] as is fitting and right, let the bishop ® be appointed, being chosen by all the people according to the will of the Holy Ghost,® being without fault,’ chaste,$ quiet, mild, without anxiety, watchful,° not a money-lover! blameless," not quarrelsome, ready to forgive, a teacher, not given to much speaking, a lover of good things,» a lover of labour, a lover of widows, a lover of orphans, a lover of the xxi, 12. 2Lit.: all of it. : 3 Or: of reading. (presbyter) for éricxomos. piddeyaGos, Tit. i. 8., where R.V. renders ‘‘a lover of good,” A.V. “a lover of good men,” and A.V. margin, as has been done here by the Pshitta and by James of Edessa, ‘‘a lover of good things.” poor, experienced in the mysteries,’ not lax? and distracted in company with this world, peaceful, and in all good things perfect, as one to whom the order and? place of God is entrusted. It is good indeed that + he be without a wife, but at any rate that he have been® the husband of one wife only, so that he may sympathise with the weakness of widows. Let him be appointed when he is of middle age, not a youth.

## Chapter 21

Being such as this, let him receive ordination” on the first day of the week, all consenting to his appointment, and bearing witness to him, with all the neighbouring presbyters and bishops. Let those bishops lay hands on him, having first washed their hands, but let the presbyters stand beside them, not speaking, in fear, lifting up their hearts in silence. After [that], let the bishops lay hands on him, saying: We lay hands on the servant of God, who hath been chosen in the Spirit, for the true and pious ® disposing ® of the Church, which alone hath the principality, and which is not dissolved, of the invisible [and] living God, and for the delivering of true judgment and divine and holy revelations, and of divine gifts and faithful doctrines of the Trinity, by the cross, by the resurrection, by the incorruptibility, in the holy Church of God. After this, one bishop, commanded by the other bishops, shall lay hands on him, saying his calling of appointment, thus : PRAYER OF ORDINATION™ oF A BISHOP O God, who hast done ™ all things in power, and hast established them, and hast founded the inhabited world in reason, and hast adorned the crown of all these things which ! Or: sacraments. 2M.B.: carried away. 3M.: or. See Note. Nl yecporovia transliterated. 2 Or: made. were made by Thee; who hast given to them to keep Thy commandments in fear; who hast bestowed upon us the understanding of the truth, and hast made known unto us that good Spirit of Thine; who didst send Thy beloved Son, the only Saviour, without spot, for our salvation; O God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Father of mercies and God of all comfort who in the pure heights dost dwell eternally, who art high and adorable, dreadful? and great ; who seest all things, who knowest all things before they are, with whom all things were before they were [made]*; who gavest illumination to the Church by the grace * of Thy Onlybegotten Son, having foreordained from the beginning those who delight in just things, and do those things that are holy, to dwell in Thy habitations ; who didst choose Abraham, who pleased Thee by his faith, and didst translate holy Enoch ° to the treasure-house of life; who hast ordered princes and priests in Thine upper” sanctuary; O Lord, who didst call [them] to praise and glorify the Name of Thee and of Thy Only-begotten in the place of Thy glory; O Lord God, who before the foundation of the world didst not leave Thine upper’ sanctuary without a ministry, and also, since the foundation of the world, hast adorned and glorified Thy sanctuaries [on earth] with faithful princes and priests, after the pattern ® of Thine [own] heaven; Thou, Lord, even now also art ® well pleased to be praised, and hast vouchsafed that there should be princes for Thy people: Cause to shine forth and pour out understanding, and the grace which cometh from Thy princely Spirit, which 4 Thou didst deliver to Thy beloved Son Jesus Christ; give wisdom, O God, [give] reasoning,” strength, power, unity of spirit 1° to do all things by Thy 4Or: lovingkindness. So often. this passage. co-operation. Give the Spirit which is Thine, O holy God; send to Thy holy and pure Church, and to every place which singeth to Thee “Holy,” Him who was given to Thy Holy One ; and grant, O Lord, that this Thy servant may please Thee? for doxology,? and for laud without ceasing, O God, for fitting hymns of praise, and for suitable times,* for acceptable prayers, for faithful asking, for an upright mind, for a meek heart, for the working of life and of meekness and of truth, for the knowledge of uprightness. O Father, who knowest the hearts,> [grant] to this Thy servant whom Thou hast chosen for the episcopate, to feed Thy holy flock, and to stand at the head of the priesthood without fault, ministering to Thee day and night; grant that Thy face® may be seen by him ; vouchsafe, O Lord, that he may offer to Thee the offerings of Thy holy Church carefully [and] with all fear ; bestow upon him that he may have Thy powerful?’ Spirit to loose all bands, as Thou didst bestow [Him] on Thy apostles, to please Thee in meekness; fill him full of love, knowledge, understanding, discipline, perfectness, strength, and a pure heart, when he prayeth for the people, and when he mourneth for those who commit folly and draweth them to [receive] help; when he offereth to Thee praises and thanksgivings and prayers for a sweet-smelling savour® through Thy beloved Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom [are given] to Thee praise and honour and might, with the Holy Ghost, both before the worlds, and also now, and at all times, and for ever and ever without end. Amen. And let the people say: Amen. And then let them® cry out : He is worthy, He is worthy, He is worthy. After he is [ordained], let the people keep the feast three days, according to the mystery that in three days [our i Lit.: work. Lord] rose from the dead. And let every one give him the Peace.

## Chapter 22

Let him be constant at the altar; in prayers let him be persistent day and night, especially at the obligatory times of night; at the first hour, at midnight, and at early twilight when the star of the dawn riseth. Then also in the morning,’ at the third, sixth, ninth [hours, and the] twelfth hour at the lamp [lighting]. If also at every hour he offer prayers without ceasing for the people and for himself, he doeth well. Let him abide in the house of the Church alone. If he have one or two likeminded ? with himself, it is good that he should be with them for united supplication in unison? For where two or three are gathered together in My Name, ye know that I have said unto you that I am in the midst of them.* But if he cannot abide all night long, yet let him remain these hours that I have said. For then the angels visit the Church. Let him fast three days each [week]® (?) all the year. But for three weeks after his appointment let him maintain the fast according to the number of the eighteen Exalted Entrances by which the Only-begotten passed when He came to the passion. But on the first day of the week only let him feed on bread with oil and honey and salt, and all fruits of trees; but let him in no wise taste wine, except only the cup of the Offering. This® let him use whether ill or well. For it is good that this be for the priests only.’ And so after these weeks all the year, let him fast three days each § [week]; and for the rest of the time let him fast according to his strength. But in no wise let him eat meat, not because if he taste or eat [meat] he is to be blamed, but because when he loveth infirmity these strong meats are not fitting,!° and in order that he may watch. 4S8t. Matt. xviii. 20, almost exactly. Let the Offering + only be on Saturday, or on the first day of the week, and on a fast-day. On the eve? let him instruct and teach these things in the manner of a mystery to® those whom he hath tested + as having ears to hear’ But if he be sick in body, let him quickly take care to heal himself, feeding on fish, and constantly [taking] a little wine of the Holy thing, that the Church may not also come to an end because he is lying sick ; but [that] those who learn may receive joy. But when teaching in the Church, let him speak thus carefully, as a man who knoweth that he is speaking for a testimony the doctrine of all the ministry of the Father of all, that [doctrine] which is accurately written. Let him say all these things—all those which he accurately knoweth and remembereth of old.§ For if he knoweth what he saith, he may have hope that his hearers also [will] have known these things. And with all his labour, let him beseech the Lord, so that his word may bring forth the fruits’ of the Holy Spirit in them that hear. Let him do everything in order, and with knowledge. Let him dismiss the catechumens after he hath admonished them with meditations ® and admonitions of the Prophets and Apostles? with instructive words, so that they may know Him whom they confess. But let him teach the faithful after the manner of a mystery, having first dismissed the catechumens ; and after the instruction in the mysteries let him offer, so that knowing in what mystery they are taking part, they may offer with fear.

## Chapter 23

Let him offer on Saturday three loaves for a complete symbol” of the Trinity ; but on the first day of the week let him offer four loaves for a complete symbol! of the Gospel. 3M. B.: and to. 4 Lit.: testeth. 7So pl. in Gal. v, 22, Pshitta. 8M.: meditation. this chapter, page 77. Or: according to the complete [number] of the Trinity . according to the complete [number] of the Gospel. Because that the ancient people erred, when he offereth let the veil in front of the door be closed, and within it let him offer with the presbyters and deacons and the canonical widows, and subdeacons and deaconesses and readers [and] those who have gifts. But let the bishop stand first in the middle, and the presbyters immediately behind him on either side, and the widows immediately behind the presbyters on the left side, and the deacons also behind the presbyters on the right hand side; the readers behind them, and the subdeacons behind the readers, and the deaconesses behind the subdeacons. Let the bishop then place his hand on those loaves which have been set on the altar, and let the presbyters place their hands together with him, and let the rest stand only.? Let not the loaf of catechumens® be received; not even if he have a believing son or wife and wish to offer on their behalf; let it not be offered + unless he is baptized Before the bishop or presbyter offereth, let the people give the Peace ® to one another. Then, a great silence being made, let the deacon say thus : ADMONITION OF THE DEACON ON THE EUCHARIST? [Lift up] your hearts to ® heaven. If any man have wrath against his companion, let him be reconciled.® If any man have’ a conscience without faith, let him confess [it]. If any man have a thought foreign to the commandments, let him depart. If any man have fallen into sin, let him not hide himself: he may # not hide himself.! If any man have a disordered reason, let him not draw near. If any man be defiled, if any man be not firm, let him give place. If any man be a stranger to the commandments of Jesus, let him depart. If any man despise the prophets, let him separate himself : from the wrath of the Only-begotten let him deliver himself. Let us not despise the cross. Let us flee from threatening. We have our Lord as onlooker, the Father of Lights? with the Son, [and] the angels * who visit [us]. See to yourselves that ye be not in* anger against your neighbours. See that no man be in wrath: God seeth. [Lift] wp your hearts to offer for the salvation of life and of holiness. In the wisdom of God let us receive the grace which hath been bestowed upon us. Then let the bishop say, giving and rendering thanks with an awed voice : Our Lord [be] with you. And let the people say: And with thy spirit. Let the bishop say : [Lift] up your hearts. Let the people say : They are [lifted up] unto the Lord. Let the bishop say : Let us give thanks to the Lord. And let all the people say: It is meet and right. And let the bishop ery: Holy things in holy [persons]. And let the people call out: In heaven and on earth without ceasing. EUCHARIST ® OR THANKSGIVING OVER THE OFFERING & Let the bishop immediately say : We render thanks to Thee, O God, the Holy One, Con1] Thess. v, 20. the Father of lights. Cf. St. Jas. i. 17. ? ebxapiorta transliterated. 6°M.: offerings. firmer of our souls, and Giver of our life, the Treasure of incorruptibility, and Father of the Only-begotten, our Saviour, whom ‘in the latter times Thou didst send to us as a Saviour and Proclaimer of Thy purpose For it is Thy purpose * that we should be saved in Thee. Our heart giveth thanks unto Thee, O Lord, [our] mind, [our] soul, with all [its] thinking, that Thy grace may come upon us, O Lord, so that we may continually praise Thee, and Thy Only-begotten Son, and Thy Holy Ghost, now and alway, and for ever and ever. Amen. O Thou Power of the Father, the Grace of the nations, Knowledge, true Wisdom, the Exaltation of the meek, the Medicine of souls,? the Confidence of us who believe,* for Thou art the Strength of the righteous, the Hope of the persecuted, the Haven of those who are buffeted, the Uluminator of the perfect, the Son of the living God’ make to arise on us, out of Thy gift which cannot be searched into, courage, might, reliance, wisdom, strength, unlapsing faith, unshaken hope, the knowledge of Thy Spirit, meekness [and] uprightness, so that alway, O Lord, we Thy servants, and all the people, may praise Thee purely, may bless Thee, may give thanks unto Thee, Lord, at all times, and may beseech Thee. And also let the bishop say : Thou, Lord, the Founder of the heights, and King of the treasuries of light, Visitor of the heavenly Sion, King of the orders of archangels,’ of Dominions, Praises, Thrones, Raiments, Lights, Joys, Delights, the Father of kings, who holdest all in Thy hand, and suppliest’” [all] by Thy reason, through Thine Only-begotten Son who was crucified for our sins: Thou, Lord, didst send Thy Word, who is of Thy counsel and covenants by whom Thou madest all things, being well pleased with Him, into a virgin womb; who, when He was conceived, 1Or: thought. Cf. Jer. xxix. 11. 2 Or: the intelligence. Medicine of the meek, Exaltation of souls. 7Or: managest. [and] made flesh, was shown to be Thy Son, being born of the Holy Ghost and the Virgin’; who, fulfilling Thy ; will, and preparing a holy people,” stretched forth His hands? to suffering, that He might loose from sufferings and corruption and + death those who have hoped in thee; who when He was betrayed to voluntary suffering that He might raise up® those who had slipped, and find those who were lost, and give life to the dead, and loose [the pains of] death, and rend the bonds of the Devil, and fulfil the counsel of the Father, and tread down Sheol, and open the way of life, and guide the righteous to light, and fix the boundary, and lighten the darkness, and nurture the babes, and reveal the resurrection ; taking bread, gave it to His disciples, saying, Take, eat, this is My Body which is broken for you for the forgiveness of sins.© When ye shall do’ this, ye make’ My resurrection. Also the cup of wine which He mixed He gave for a type of the Blood which he shed for us. And also let him say : Remembering § therefore Thy death and resurrection, we offer to Thee bread and the cup, giving thanks to Thee who alone art God for ever, and our Saviour, since® Thou hast promised ” to us to stand before Thee and to serve Thee in priesthood. } , Therefore we render thanks to Thee, we Thy servants, O Lord. And let the people say likewise. And also let [the bishop] say : We offer to Thee this thanksgiving, Eternal Trinity, O 1Or: a virgin. 21 St. Pet. ii. 9; Ex. xix. 6. nearly St. Matt. xxvi. 27, 28, and 1 Cor. xi. 24, 25. Syriac. Lord Jesus Christ, O Lord the Father before! whom all creation and every nature trembleth fleeing into itself, O Lord the Holy Ghost; we have brought? this drink and this food of Thy Holiness [to Thee]; Cause that it may be to us not for condemnation, not for reproach, not* for destruction, but for the medicine and support of our spirit. Yea, O God, grant us that by Thy Name every thought of things displeasing to Thee may flee away. Grant, O God, that every proud conception may be driven away from us by Thy Name which is written within the veils* of Thy sanctuaries, those high ones—a Name which, when Sheol heareth [it], it is amazed, the depth is rent, the spirits are driven away, the dragon is bruised,’ unbelief is cast out, disobedience is subdued, anger is appeased, envy worketh not, pride is reproved, avarice rooted out, boasting taken away, arrogance humbled, [and] every root of bitterness® destroyed. Grant therefore, O Lord, to our innermost eyes to see Thee, praising Thee and glorifying Thee, commemorating’ Thee [and] serving Thee, having a portion in Thee alone, O Son and Word of God, who subduest® all things. Sustain unto the end those who have® gifts of revelations¢ Confirm those who have ® a gift of healing! Make those courageous who have? the power of tongues." Keep those who have? the word of doctrine® upright. Care for those who do Thy will alway.1* Visit the widows. Help the orphans. Remember those who have fallen asleep in the faith. And grant us an inheritance with 3M. omits: not. 4 Lit.: faces of the doors. for “bitterness,” but it seems to be either (1) a misprint of one letter—the correcting of which would yield “bitterness, or (2) ‘‘ master” is taken for a masterful and overweening spirit, which would rather rule than be ruled, rather teach than be taught. Cf. St. Jas. iii, 1. Sec Appendix I for the parallels in the Abyssinian Anaphora of our Lord. M4“ Alway” may refer to either verb. 1 B. omits: and. Thy saints, and bestow [upon us] the power to please Thee as they also pleased Thee. Feed the people in uprightness : sanctify us all, O God; but grant that all those who partake and receive of Thy Holy Things may be made one with Thee, so that they may be filled with the Holy Ghost, for the confirmation of the faith in truth, that they may lift up always a doxology to Thee, and to Thy beloved Son Jesus Christ, by whom praise and might [be] unto Thee, with Thy Holy Spirit for ever and ever. Let the people say: Amen.* The deacon: Karnestly let us beseech our Lord and our God that He may bestow upon us concord ® of spirit.* The bishop: Give us concord® in the Holy Spirit, and heal our souls by this offering, that we may live in Thee in all the ages of ages. The people: Amen. Let the people also pray in the same [words]. After these things the seal of thanksgiving thus: Let the Name of the Lord be blessed for ever. The people: Amen. The priest: Blessed is He that hath come® in the Name of the Lord.® Blessed [is] the Name of His praise. And let all the people say: So be it, so be it. Let the bishop say: Send the grace of the Spirit upon us. If the bishop be polluted, let him not offer, but let a? presbyter offer. Also let him not receive of the mystery,® not as though he were defiled, but because of the honour of the altar. But after he hath fasted and bathed in pure water, let him approach and minister. Similarly also a presbyter. And wf also a widow be menstruous, let her not approach. Similarly if a woman or a layman or any of the company [of the clergy be polluted), let him not approach, for the honour [of the altar] except after fasting and bathing.* Let the priests first receive, thus: the bishops, presbyters, deacons, widows, readers, subdeacons. After these those that have gifts, those newly baptized, babes.® The people thus: old men, virgins® and the rest. The women [thus]: deaconesses, and after that the rest. Let each one when he receiveth the thanksgiving" say before he partaketh: Amen. After that let him pray thus ; after that ® he receiveth the Eucharist® let him say: Holy, Holy, Holy, Trinity ineffable, grant me to receive unto life’ this Body, {and] not unto condemnation. And grant me to bring forth the fruits that are pleasing to Thee, so that when I shall be shown to be pleasing to Thee I may live in Thee, doing Thy commandments ; and [that] with boldness I may call Thee Father, when I call for Thy kingdom and Thy will [to come] to me.” -May Thy Name be hallowed! in me, O Lord; for Thou art mighty and [to be] praised, and to Thee be praise for ever and ever. Amen. After the prayer let him receive. When he taketh of the Cup, let him say twice Amen,’ for a complete symbol? of the Body and Blood. After all receive, let them pray, giving and rendering thanks Sor the reception, the deacon saying : Let us give thanks unto the Lord, receiving His Holy Things, so that the reception [of them] may be for the life and salvation of our souls. Let us beg and beseech [His grace], raising a doxology to the Lord our God. After that let the bishop [say]: O Lord, Giver of light eternal,’ the Helmsman of souls, the Guide of saints ; Give us understanding eyes which always look to Thee, and ears which hear Thee only, so that our soul may be filled with grace. Create * in us a clean heart,’ O God; so that we may alway comprehend Thy greatness. O° God, Wonderful, who lovest man,’ make our souls better, and, by this Eucharist ® which we, Thy servants, who fail in much,® have [now] received, form our thoughts so that they shall not swerve: for Thy kingdom is blessed, O Lord God, [who art] glorified and praised in Father and in Son and in Holy Ghost, both before the worlds, and now, and alway, and for the ages and for ever and ever without end. The people: Amen.

## Chapter 24

Lf the priest consecrate oil for the healing of those who of Gen. xli. 32. suffer, let him say thus, quietly placing the vessel before the altar : O Lord God, who hast bestowed upon us the Spirit, the Paraclete? the Lord,? the saving and unshaken Name, which is hidden from the foolish but revealed unto the wise*; O Christ, who didst sanctify us, and by Thy mercies dost make the servants whom Thou choosest wise with the wisdom that is Thine, who didst send the knowledge of Thy Spirit to us sinners by the holiness which is Thine, bestowing on us the power of the Spirit ; who art the Healer of every sickness and of every suffering®; who didst give the gift of healing® to those who were counted worthy of this by Thee; send on this oil, which is the type of Thy fatness, the delivering [power] of Thy good compassion, that it may deliver those who labour and heal those who are sick, and sanctify those who return, when they approach to Thy faith ; for Thou art mighty and [to be] praised for ever and ever. The people: Amen.

## Chapter 25

Likewise, the same also over water.

## Chapter 26

At early dawn let the bishop assemble the people, so that the service may be finished before the rising of the sun.7 When he saith the First Hymn of Praise, of the Dawn, the presbyters and deacons and the rest, the faithful also, [standing] close by, let him say thus: be to St. John xiv. 17. Praise to the Lord. And let the people say: It is meet and right. HYMN OF PRAISE FOR THE DAWN The bishop: It is meet and right that we should praise and laud and give thanks to Thee, who didst make all, ineffable God. Stretching forth! our souls upward, we raise to Thee, O Lord, a hymn of praise for the morning,—to Thee who art all-wise, powerful, great in mercies, O God, the Confirmer and Raiser-up of our souls ; we praise Thee, the Word who before the worlds wast begotten of the Father, and restest alone with Thy saints? who art praised with the hymns of the archangels——Thee the Maker, who wast not made with hands, and who makest known holy things which are invisible, pure, and spotless——Thee who hast made known to us the hidden mysteries? of wisdom, and didst promise to us immortal light; we lift up praise to Thee in pure holiness, we Thy servants, O Lord. And let the people say: We praise Thee, we bless Thee, we give thanks to Thee, O Lord; and we beseech Thee, O our God. Also [let] the bishop say: O God, the Begetter of light, the Principle* of life, the Giver of knowledge, the Gift of grace, the Maker of souls, who makest things [that are] beautiful, the Giver of the Holy Ghost, the Treasure of Wisdom, and the Maker of good things, the Lord, the Teacher of holiness, who rulest® the worlds by Thy will, the Receiver of pure prayers; we praise Thee, the Only-begotten Son, the First-born and Word of the Father, who didst bestow all Thy 1B.: having stretched forth. Morning Psalm, v. 4. grace on us who call upon Thee, the Helper, and upon the Father who begat Thee; who hast an essence that cannot be injured, where neither moth nor worm?! doth corrupt?; who givest to all that with all their heart trust in Thee those things which the angels have desired to behold ;3 who art the Guardian of light eternal and [of] treasures incorruptible ; who hast by the will of Thy Father shed light on the darkness which [is] in us; who from the depth hast raised us up to light; who hast given us life out of* death, and bestowed upon us freedom out of * slavery ; who by the cross hast made us of the household of ° Thy Father, and by Thy gospel hast guided us to the heights of heaven, and hast comforted us by Thy prophets; who in Thine own Person hast made us of the household of God the Father of lights®; grant us, O Lord, that we may praise Thee, our God, so that always with unceasing thanksgiving’ we may speak praises to Thee, we Thy servants, O Lord. The people: We praise Thee, we bless Thee, we give thanks to Thee, we beseech Thee, O our God. Let the bishop also say: We sing to Thee with our mouths this triple hymn of praise as a figure of Thy kingdom, O Son of God, who [art] by § eternity; who [art] above all, with the Father ; whom all creation praiseth, trembling with fear of Thy Spirit; at whom all nature trembleth in fear and [whom] every soul of the righteous blesseth; with whom all we have taken refuge; who hast made confusion, storms, [and] wind to cease from us; who hast been to us an haven of rest,® and a place to flee unto from corruption; in whom we have hope of eternal salvation; who makest the peacefulness of fine weather 1° for those who are buffeted on the seas and with the tempests; who in sicknesses! art entreated and healest without price; who art with those that are shut up in prison; who hast loosed us from the bonds of death ; [who art] the Comforter of the poor, and of those who mourn, and of those who have laboured and wearied themselves with the cross; who turnest away from us every menace!; who for us hast reproved the craft of Satan; who drivest away his menaces,? and givest us courage; who thrustest away all error from those that trust in Thee; whom the prophets and apostles praised secretly: we praise Thee, O Lord, we lift up to Thee a doxology, so that, having known Thee, we may rest in the habitations of life, doing Thy will alway. And grant to us, O Lord, to walk according to Thy commandments, and in mercy visit us all, both small and great, the prince and his people, the shepherd and his flock ; for Thou, O Lord, art our God, and blessed and praised [is] Thy kingdom—T|the kingdom] of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, both before the worlds, and now and always, and for the ages, and for ever and ever without end. And let the people say: Amen. Let them sing psalms and four hymns of praise ; one? by Moses, and of Solomon, and of the other prophets. Thus: little singing-boys* ; two virgins®; three deacons ; three presbyters. And so let the hymn of praise be said by the bishop, or by one of the presbyters. Let wt be said thus: The grace of our Lord [be] with you all. And let the people say: And with thy spirit. And let the priest say: Also let us praise our Lord. little boys. And let the people say: Meetly and rightly. Let the priest say: Let your hearts be fixed. And let the people say: We have [them fixed] with the Lord. HYMN OF PRAISE OF THE SEAL! O Lord, the Father, the Giver of light, the Author of all power and of all spirits, the Sealer of eternal light, and the Guide of life, the Maker of felicity and immortality, who hast made us to pass through material darkness, and hast bestowed upon us? immaterial light; who hast loosed the bonds of disobedience and crowned us with the faith which is Thine; who dost not keep far off from Thy servants, but art in them always ; who dost not neglect those [souls] which with labour and in Thy fear beseech Thee; who knowest all things before they are thought,3 and searchest out all things before they are considered,* and givest what Thou wilt give before we ask Thee*®; who art well pleased to hear’ those who with heart undoubting serve Thee, O King of the highest lights and the soldiery ® of heaven, who hearest the archangels when they praise Thee,® and art pleased in them; Answer us, O Lord, we beseech Thee. Grant us with boldness [with] unceasing voice to praise Thee, to laud Thee, to lift up to Thee a doxology ; so that being guarded by Thee and guided in light, we Thy servants, O Lord, may constantly praise Thee. The people: We praise Thee, we bless Thee, we give thanks to Thee, O Lord; and we beseech Thee, O our God. The priest: O Lord Jesus, hear us, O Holy One, who before we ask Thee to give.” Cf. Isa. Ixv. 24. wast the Voice of the dumb and the irrational, the Strength of the paralysed, the Giver of light to the blind, the Guide of the lame, the Cleanser of the lepers, the Curer of material fluxes, the Healer of the deaf and dumb, the Reprover of death, the Tormentor of darkness, the Ray of light, and the Lamp that is not quenched,! the Sun that is not darkened * [and] resteth [not]; but who always givest light unto* Thy saints; who hast established all things together for the good likeness * of comeliness ; who art the well-tempered Reason ; who hast plainly given light to all; who art the Saviour of the sons of men,* and the Converter of souls; who art the Provider of all things as is right, the Maker of the angels, who adornest all; the Thought of the Father; who didst found the worlds in prudence and wisdom, and didst establish them together; and wast sent from Thy eternal Father unto us ; the Intelligence of the Spirit who may not be apprehended or understood, the Maker-known of things invisible; Thou art glorious, and Thy Name is Wonderful.’ Therefore we also, Thy servants, O Lord, give praise to Thee. The people: We praise Thee, we bless Thee, we give thanks to Thee, O Lord; we beseech Thee, O our Lord. The priest: We sing, O holy Lord, this threefold hymn of praise to Thee, who didst give us a faith in Thee which cannot be loosed, whereby Thou didst make us to conquer the bonds of death; who didst create upright minds in ® them that trust in Thee, that they might be gods®; who by the Spirit didst give unto us to tread under foot all the power of the enemy that we! may not profane those things which may not be 1Cf, 2Sam. xiv. 7 and xxi. 17. thereon, St. John x. 34; or to 2 St. Pet. i. 4. profaned ; who by Thy mediation hast made friendship for us with Thy Father. Answer us Thy servants, O Lord, [Thou] whom without ceasing! we entreat,? who at our supplication givest ® [us] power against the adversary; whom alway we ask, as [it were], for the overthrow of the Evil one; Hear us, O King Eternal; comfort the widows, help the orphans; pity and cleanse those who are possessed with unclean spirits, give wisdom to the unwise*; convert those who go astray; deliver those who are in prison; guard us all, for Thou, O Lord, art our God; blessed and glorious is Thy kingdom. The people: Amen.

## Chapter 27

After this let the prayer be completed, and let the reader then read the Prophets and the rest; let the presbyter or deacon read the Gospel; and then let the bishop or presbyter teach those things which are convenient and profitable. After that let there be a prayer, and let the catechumens receive a laying on of the hand.

## Chapter 28

After that let the bishop teach the mysteries® to the people. But if he be not present,® let a? presbyter speak so that the faithful may know to whom they are approaching and who is their’ God and Father. Then let the teaching ® of the mysteries be said thus: [MYSTAGOGIA oR] INITIATION ® INTO THE MYSTERIES WHICH IS SAID BEFORE THE OFFERING TO THE FAITHFUL [We confess] Him who is pre-existent,!° and was present, 4B.: unwise [things] ; or: unwise [women]. 7Or: the. 8 Lit.: to them. translated into Syriac. and is, and cometh!; who suffered and was buried,? and rose, and was glorified by the Father; who loosed our cords from death, who rose from the dead; who is not only Man ® but therewith also God; who by the Holy Ghost restored the flesh of Adam with [his] soul to immortality, because He preserved * Adam by the Spirit®; who clothed Himself with dead ® Adam and made him to live; who ascended into heaven ; under whom, after the cross,’ Death fell, and® was conquered, when its bonds, whereby the Devil sometimes® waxed strong and prevailed against us, were dissolved ; [and] through whose passion [Death] was manifested useless and weak when [Jesus] cut his cords and his power, when his snares were cut, and He struck him on his face, [even Death] who was filled with darkness and was shaken, and feared, beholding the Only-begotten Son; who in His [human] soul" descended in the Godhead into Sheol ?#; who descended from the pure heights above the heavens; Him [we confess] the indivisible Thought who is from the Father, and [is] of one will with Him; Him the Maker, with His Father, of heaven; who is the Angels’ Crown, the Archangels’ Strength, the Raiment of the Hosts and the Spirit of the Dominions; Him, the Ruler of the everlasting Kingdom, and Prince of the Saints, the unfathomable Intelligence of the Father; Him who is the Wisdom, the Power, the Lord, the Thought, Intelligence, Hand, Arm™ of the Father. As we believe, we confess Him who is our Light, Salvation, Saviour, Protector, Helper, Teacher, Deliverer, Rewarder, Assister, Strength, Wall; our Shepherd, Entrance, Door, Way, spirit” or ‘‘in the spirit.” not in the Syriac. Life, Medicine, Provision, Drink, [and] Judge. We confess Him passible [yet] not passible, Son? [yet] not created,’ dead [yet] alive, the Son of the Father, incomprehensible [yet] comprehensible; who, [Himself] sinless, hath borne® our sins when He left the Father’s heaven; whose Body being broken becometh our salvation, and [His] Blood and Spirit [our] life and holiness, and the water * our cleansing ; who giveth light * to the hearts of those who fear Him, being with them in all things; who hath made us strangers to the whole way of the Devil; the Renewer of souls, in whom we all have put our trust. He, being God, and before the worlds with® the Father, eternal God,° when He saw the world perishing in the bonds of sin, and trodden down by the power of a crafty wild beast, and made subject to death through ignorance and error, determining to heal the race of mankind, came to a virgin womb, though hidden from all the camps of the heavenly ones, and cast into ignorance [the] opposing hosts. But when [He], the Incorruptible, clothed Himself with corruptible fiesh, making flesh which was under death to be incorruptible, He thus showed in the flesh of dead Adam, wherewith He clothed Himself, an example’ of incorruptibility, by which example? the things of corruption were abolished. He delivered indeed holy commandments through the Gospel, which is the fore-proclaiming of the kingdom; by which Gospel as® a figure of the kingdom we learned to live®; through which Gospel the bonds of the Devil have been cut, so that we may attain? immortality instead of 1 death, and instead of ™ ignorance may receive [the grace] of watchfulness. He, then, having become Man,! the Son of God, the Lord, who took [on Him] the dead race of Adam in all its kinds, by emptying [Himself !*], He who is the First, came to birth, 3B. omits: as. ° Or: to live as a figure, ete. as Man,! though He is God; He who was foreknown by the prophets,” and preached by the apostles, and lauded by angels, and glorified by the Father of all’ He was crucified for us; and His cross is our life, our strength, [our] salvation, for it is the hidden mystery,‘ the ineffable joy, and through it the whole nature of mankind, always bearing it, is made inseparable from God, for it is the virtue® benign’ and inseparable & from God, that cannot be spoken as is meet by these lips, [and] that was hidden from the beginning; but now the mystery which is revealed, which is for the faithful, shall be, not as it seemeth to be, but as it is. This cross in which we boast, so that we may be glorified, [and] the bearers whereof, the faithful and perfect, separate their souls from everything that can be felt, from everything that is seen, as from a thing which is not true? —by this ask for yourselves, O ye who quit you like men’; make deaf your visible ears"; make blind your bodily ¥ eyes ; so that ye may know the will of Christ and all the mystery of your salvation. Holy men? and women, whose property it is to make your boast in the Lord, listen to the inward man.!* Our Lord, when He taught us and appointed to us a covenant, and made us of [His] household, and came, after His passion, into Sheol, made captive all the earth—He who made the nature of death captive to life, and Death when it saw Him descending in His soul’® to Sheol, was deceived, and hoped that He was food for him, as was his custom. But when he saw in Him the beauty of the Godhead, he cried out with [his] voice, saying: Who is this that hath clothed Himself with Man who [was] under me, and hath conquered 1Or: Son of Man. 2 Cf. Rom. xvi. 25, 26. 7Or: pitiful. 8 Lit.: cannot be separated. Ul Lit.: hearings. 12 Lit.: open; or: revealed. me? Who is this that snatcheth from destruction flesh which was bound by me? Who is this! that hath clothed Himself with earth but [Himself] is heaven? Who is this that was born in corruptibility, but suffereth no corruption ?? Who is this [that is] a stranger to my laws? Who is this that maketh captive those that are mine? Who is this that striveth with the power of burning Death,® and conquereth darkness? What is this new glory which [is] in this vision that preventeth me from doing the things which I would? Who is this new dead One without sin? Who is this that by the abundance of light extinguisheth darkness, and doth not allow* me to have rule over those that are mine, but draweth to heaven the souls which were given unto me? What is this glory which preventeth the body from being corruptible? Who is this whom I cannot touch®? What is this glory unsearchable ® to its surroundings? Woe’ isme! I am put to flight’® by Him and by those things which are His, for I cannot ® injure them. He, being the Christ, who was crucified, by whom the [things] that were on the left hand were’ [placed] on the right hand, and those which were beneath [were] as those which [were] above, and those which [were] behind as those which {were] before, when He rose from the dead, and trod down Sheol, and by death slew Death"; after 12 He rose on the third day He gave thanks to the Father, saying: I give thanks to Thee, O My Father, not with these lips which are fixed together, nor yet with a corporeal tongue through which truth and lying go out, nor with this created and material word *; but I give thanks to Thee, the King, with that Voice which through Thee understandeth all [things], which cometh not by a bodily organ, which falleth not on carnal ears, which 1B. omits: this. 2 Cf. Acts xiii. 37. 3 Lit.: the flame of Death. is not in the world and is not left on earth, but with this Voice, the Spirit who! is in Us, only speaking to Thee, O Father, loving Thee, praising Thee, through whom? also the whole choir of perfect saints calleth Thee beloved, [calleth] Thee Father,? [calleth] Thee Sustainer, [calleth] Thee Helper ; for Thou art all, and all [are] in Thee; for whatever is, is Thine and not another’s, but is Thine alone, who art for ever and ever. Amen: Let the shepherd know the mysteries * of all* nature. After I have prayed to the Father, as ye know and see, I am taken up, saith Jesus. Therefore it is right that the shepherd should speak the teaching of the Initiation into the mysteries, so that they may know of whom in the holy things they are partaking, and what® memorial they are making’ through the Eucharist.® And at the end, after this, let him say thus: As then we also have taken refuge in Him, and have learnt that it is in Him alone to give, let us beg from Him those things which He said that He would give® us, which eye hath not seen and ear hath not heard, and [which] have not entered” into the heart of man," the things which God hath prepared for them that love Him,!? as Moses ® and some of the saints have said. As then we have hoped in Him, let us give to Him praise; and to Him be glory and might for ever and ever. Amen. Let the people say: Amen. ™ Masculine ; therefore it means the Holy Ghost. The reference is perhaps to Deut. xxix. 4; but it is more probably a blunder. After the people are taught the Initiation’ into the mysteries, let the Eucharist be offered ; but let not the Initiation into the mysteries be said each time, but only at Pascha,? on Saturday, and on the first day of the week, and on the days of the Epiphany and of Pentecost.

## Chapter 29

Let a presbyter be ordained}? being testified to by all the people, according to what has been said before *; skilled in reading, meek, poor? not money-loving,® having laboured much in ministrations among the weak, proved to be pure, without blame; if he have been as a father to the orphans, if he have ministered to the poor; if he have not grown cold [in his love] for the Church’; if* in all things he be pious, quiet, so that being [thus] he may in all respects be worthy to have those things that are fitting and suitable revealed to him by God, and also may be counted worthy of the gift of healing.

## Chapter 30

Then let the appointment ® of the presbyter be thus. All the priestly company conducting him, the bishop laying his hand on his head, the presbyters touching him and holding him, let the bishop begin, and say thus: is misprinted in Rahmani’s Syriac text. 7B.: if he have not neglected (or left uncultivated) the Church ; Coptoarab,: diligently frequenting the church. Note on I. 20, p. 153, PRAYER OF ORDINATION! OF A PRESBYTER O God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Ineffable One, the Light,? who hast neither beginning nor ending,’ the Lord, who hast ordered‘ all things, and set bounds to {them *], and by reason hast defined the order of all things by Thee created; Hear us, and look upon this Thy servant, and make him partaker of, and grant unto him, the Spirit ® of grace and of reason and of strength, the Spirit® of the presbyterate 7 who doth not grow old,’ and is indissoluble, homogeneous loving the faithful, rebuking, that he may help and govern Thy people by labour, by fear, by a pure heart, by holiness, by excellency, by wisdom, and by the working of the Holy Spirit, through Thy care, O Lord. In like manner as when Thou didst look upon Thy People, the Chosen, Thou didst command Moses® to ask for the elders? and filling [them] with Thy Spirit didst bestow Him on Thy minister! so now, O Lord, bestow on [this man] abundantly 7% Thy Spirit, whom Thou didst give to those who by Thyself were made disciples, and to all those who through them truly believed in Thee* And make him worthy, being filled with Thy wisdom and Thy hidden mysteries, to feed * Thy people in holiness of heart: pure, and true; praising, blessing, lauding, giving thanks, offering a doxology alway, day and night, to Thy holy and glorious Name; labouring with cheerfulness and patience to be a vessel of Thy Holy Spirit; having and bearing alway the cross of Thy Only-begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom [be] praise and might to Thee with the Holy Ghost for ever and ever. > Lit.: placed [them] in a boundary. in Syriac). Let the people say: Amen. Let both the priests and people give him the Peace, with an holy kiss.

## Chapter 31

After he is [ordained] let him be constant at the altar, making prayers laboriously without ceasing. But sometimes alone in some house let him take a rest from the things which belong to? the house of the Lord; but not ceasing, or diminishing [one] hour, from prayers. Let him fast three days each [week ?] all the year, [on the] one [hand] that he may be perfected in intelligence ; and moreover [let him fast] according to his strength, not wandering about and going hither and thither with every spirit, but doing everything with energy. If it be revealed to a presbyter or bishop to speak, let him speak; but if not, let him not neglect and despise his work, Tf it be revealed to a presbyter to visit his parishes? and speak the word, let him go; but if not, let him entreat God * with supplication ; and if it be revealed to him to speak to them, let him speak to them, always taking the burden and load of Him who was crucified for him, and praying for all the people. Let not a presbyter or bishop be anxious about food or raiment.® God taketh thought and careth for His own in the [things ®] which He knoweth. But if, when he receiveth from any one food or clothing,’ it be said to him that he should receive also from another, let it suffice him to receive from [the first] alone, and that [only] in so far as is fitting, and as he needeth, and not to excess. In respect of firmness of faith, let a presbyter always be unchangeable; for it is such as these that God desireth ; B. omits: God. 5 Allusion to St. Matt. vi. 25 ff. and let him prove the heart of each one; lest evil) kept and buried within, make him a stranger to the grace of God. Let him not allow tares to grow in the good wheat, but let him take them away from it, and cut off, those who bring [them] into it. Let not darkness cover his light. Let him teach all the faithful at all times that they accomplish their course, as it were, in the day ?; because the children of light walk not in darkness. Let the teaching of the presbyter be fitting, and quiet and moderate, coupled? with fear and trembling ; and that of the bishop also in like manner. And in teaching let them not speak vain things; but let him say such things as the hearers when they hear may keep [in memory]. Let the presbyter be mindful of all the things that he teacheth. For in the day of the Lord the Word, it will be® demanded [of him] that he should testify to the people the things which he spake, so that those who did not hear® may be reproved. For he must’ stand before the glory of God? speaking those things which he hath taught. Thus, then, let him teach, that he perish not. Let him pray for those who hear, that the Lord may give them understanding of the Spirit, of knowledge, of truth; and let him not vainly cast pearls before swine; but let him search out [those] who are worthy, those who have heard and have performed"; lest if the Word have not brought forth fruit in them, but have perished, he himself should prove the cause ™ of its perishing. Let him not give the holy things to dogs. Let him discern the signs of those who hear the word and bring forth good fruits. But in all things let him, without anxiety, keep [the matter] for the bishop. Let him not neglect nor despise those who do good works ¥ 3B. omits: those . . . works. through teaching! But let him watch for signs in them; [and] of those [signs appearing] in them let him judge spiritually 2 by [their] sighs, weeping, earnest conversations, silence, sadness, patience, humble bowing of the head.? But that which best traineth and causeth suffering is weeping and groaning. But the work [these do] is watching, continence, fasting, quietness, unceasing prayer, meditation, faith, meekness, philanthropy, labour, weariness, love, subjection, goodness, gravity, and every [work of] light.® [On the other hand], the signs of those who do not bring forth the fruits of life are [these]:—-sloth, love of pleasure, eyes wandering in all directions, disobedience, complaining, restlessness,® a laziness’ that will not move,’ wandering about. But the work [these do] is gluttony, debauchery, anger, unbelief, idle and unseasonable laughter, confusion, neglect, error, disturbance, wantonness, love of gains, love of money, envy, contention, drunkenness, high-mindedness,? vain talking, love of praise, and every [work of] darkness. Let him recognise products such as these, and let him speak to those who are worthy. But let him not waste time! upon those who do not receive [his teaching]. For those who sow on earth without fruits shall reap miseries. Let * the presbyter, as is right and fitting, go about to the houses of those who are sick with the deacon, and visit them; let him consider and say to them those things that are fitting and proper, especially to the faithful. Let him exhort that the sick who are poor be helped by the Church, so that they also who do [deeds] of kindness may enter into the joy despise.” + pravOpwrla translated. 5 Lit.: all light. the sick, and especially the faithful. of their Lord+ Let? him confirm those who have newly become catechumens* with prophetical and evangelical utterances, with the word of teaching. Let him not neglect his prayers, for he is the figure of the archangels: but let him know that God did not spare the angels who sinned.* Let him fast; and if it is proper, let him receive of the cup. Let wine suffice him, as much as, in his judgment, profiteth and helpeth him, lest that drink which was for [his] healing he receive to [his] loss) In sickness, let him eat herbs and fish,> and also that he may have care for his work. In everything let the priest be an example ® to the faithful of the work of holiness.’ Let the presbyter praise and give thanks in the same way as the bishop.

## Chapter 32

Let them say the daily hymn of praise in the Church, each of them at his own time, thus: DAILY HYMN OF PRAISE The grace of our Lord [be] with you all. The people: And with thy spirit. The priest: Praise ye the Lord. The people: It is meet and right. The priest: Thee, O Father of incorruptibility, Deliverer of our souls, Confirmer of the thoughts, and Guardian of our hearts, who hast illumined our hearts and hast brought to an end the darkness of our intelligence, by the knowledge which is in Thee; who hast by the cross of Thy Only - begotten brought back anew® to incorruptibility the old man® which was given over to corruption °; who hast brought error to an 28.: 86. Also how a presbyter ought to conduct himself, and how he should teach and not neglect his prayers. +2 St. Pet. ii. 4 (usual printed version) almost exactly. end, and by Thy commandments hast made man?‘ to pass to immortality ; who didst seek that which was lost, we [Thy] servants [and] also [Thy] people praise. The people: We praise Thee, and the rest. The priest: We praise Thee, O Lord, whom continually the unceasing doxologies of the Archangels singing praise, and the hymns of praise? of Glories? and chants of Dominions praise. We praise Thee, O Lord, who didst send Thy Thought, Thy Word, Thy Wisdom, Thy Energy,’ [namely] Him who [is] of old, and was with Thee before the worlds, the uncreated Word of the Unereated one, but appeared, incarnate, in the end of times, for the salvation of created * man,5 Thy beloved Son Jesus Christ, who made us free from the yoke of slavery. Therefore we also, as we are accustomed, [we] Thy servants, O Lord [and] also [thy] people, praise Thee. The people: We praise Thee, and the rest. The priest: We sing to Thee a triple hymn of praise from our hearts, O Lord who givest life, to Thee who dost visit the souls of the poor, and neglectest not the spirits of those who are afflicted, the Assister of those who are persecuted, the Helper of those who are tossed on the sea, the Deliverer of those who are buffeted, the Provider for those who are hungry, who takest vengeance for those who are wronged, the Lover of the faithful, the Companion of the saints, the Habitation of the pure, the Dwelling-place of those who call on Thee in truth, the Protector of widows, the Liberator of orphans, who givest to Thy Church a right government, and hast founded® in it love-feasts, ministrations, receptions’ of the faithful, the partaking of the Spirit, gifts of grace and powers. We praise Thee; we cease not alway in our hearts picturing the image of* Thy kingdom in ourselves, for Thy sake [and] also [for the sake] of Thy beloved Son Jesus Christ, by whom [be] praise and might to Thee with the Holy Ghost, for ever and ever, Amen. And let the people say: Amen. But if also any one saith prophetical words, let him say [them]; he hath a reward. But at midnight let the sons of priestly service, and those of the people who are more perfect, give praise by themselves. For also in that hour our Lord, rising, praised His Father. of the Lord, walketh as He walked in this world, that where He is, there he may be also.

## Chapter 33

The deacon is appointed,®? chosen like the things which have before been spoken of. If he be of good conduct,’ if he be® pure, if he have been chosen for purity and for abstinence from distractions*; if not, yet [if he] be the husband of one wife,’ borne® witness to by all the faithful, not entangled® in the businesses of the world, not knowing a handicraft, without riches, without children.! But if he be married 1° or! have children,! let his children} be taught to work piety 1? and to be pure, so that they may be approved by the Church,’8 according to the rule of the ministry. But let the Church take care for them, so that they may persevere in the law and in the work of the ministry.

## Chapter 34

But let him accomplish in the Church those things which are right. Let [his] ministry be thus. First, let him do 1Or: Sons, . 2S. resumes here with the words: 37. Of the deacon. 3§.: let the deacon be appointed. For the word, see p. 90. 5M. omits: he be. ® Or: enticements. ®§.: and borne. ®§. [Lagarde]: disturbed by. only those things which are commanded by the bishop as for proclamation!; and let him be the counsellor of the whole clergy? and the mystery* of the Church; who ministereth to the sick, who ministereth to the strangers, who helpeth the widows, who is the father of the orphans, who goeth about all the houses of those that are in need, lest any be in affliction or sickness or misery. Let him go about in the houses of the catechumens, so that he may confirm those who are doubting and teach those who are unlearned.* Let him clothe those men® who have departed,’ adorning [them]; burying’ the strangers; guiding those who pass from their dwelling, or go into captivity. For the help ® of those who are in need let him notify the Church; let him not trouble the bishop; but only on the first day of the week let him make mention about everything, so that he may know. Let him be watchful at the hour of the assembly, going about in the church, and let him see that no one be [ there who is] proud, or® a buffoon, or a spy,’® or one who speaketh idle [words]. Let him rebuke [such], every one seeing and hearing, and let him thrust out him whom he hath condemued # to receive punishment, so that the others also may fear. And if [the offender] persuade him to permit him to partake, let him give? him comfort. But if the man persist in his transgression or disorderliness, let him take [word] about him up to the bishop, and let him be separated seven days, and then called; so that he be not taken captive.” But if when he cometh he still continue and persist in his folly, let him be cut off until he, repenting truly, come to himself, beseeching [to be received back, If he be in a city on the seashore, let him go quickly 1§.: patience (error). See Note, p. 190. ? «pos transliterated, 93.: and. W§,: a disturber. S.: who is guilty. about the places on the seashore, lest} there be any one dead in the sea*; let him clothe him and bury him. Similarly also let him search out the guest house,’ lest there be any one who is staying in the place sick or in need or dead; and let him make [it] known to the Church, so that it may provide what is right for each one. Let him cause the palsied and infirm to bathe‘ as is right, so that they may have a breathing space from their pains. Let him give through the Church to each one what is right.® In the Church let twelve presbyters, seven deacons, fourteen subdeacons, thirteen widows who sit in front,’ be known.® But of the deacons let him who is considered among them to be most earnest, and best in governing, be chosen to be the receiver of strangers. Let him alway be in the place ® of the guest house which is in the church, clothed in white garments, a stole only on his shoulder.

## Chapter 35

Let him be in everything as the eye of the Church, with fear admonishing," so that he may be an example to! the people of piety Let him admonish thus: ADMONITION OF THE DEACON Let us arise. Let every one know his place. Let the catechumens depart. See [that] no one polluted, no one slothful [remain]. [Lift] wp the eyes of your hearts. The angels are looking on. See [that] he who trusteth not, withdraw. 4Or: wash the palsied and infirm. 5 Or: diseases. ®§. here breaks off and goes on to the middle of I. 36. Let us beseech in concord.* Let no fornicator, no wrathful man? [remain]; if one who is a servant of evil be [here], let him withdraw. our Lord and our God and our Saviour Jesus Christ. When the presbyter or bishop beyinneth the prayer, let the people pray and kneel.* Then let the deacon say thus: For® the peace which is from heaven let us beseech, that the Lord in His mercy may give us peace. For our faith® let us beseech, that the Lord may grant unto us to keep truly unto the end the faith which is in Him. For harmony and concord let us beseech, that the Lord may keep us together in concord of the Spirit. For patience let us beseech, that the Lord may bestow [upon us| patience unto the end in all afflictions. For the Apostles let us beseech, that the Lord may grant to us to please Him, as they also pleased Him, and may make us worthy of their inheritance. For the holy prophets let us beseech, that the Lord may number us with them. For the holy confessors let us beseech, that the Lord God may grant us to fulfil [our course] with the same mind [as they]. For the bishop let us beseech, that our Lord may grant him to us for length of days’ in faith, rightly dividing® the word of truth, and standing at the head of the Church purely and without blame. For the presbyterate let us beseech, that the Lord may not take away from them the spirit of the presbyterate, but bestow on them earnestness and piety until the end. For the deacons let us beseech, that the Lord may grant unto them to run a perfect course, and to perfect holiness, and that He may remember their work and their love. For the presbyteresses let us beseech, that the Lord may hear their supplications and keep their hearts perfectly in the grace of the Spirit and help their work. For the subdeacons, readers, deaconesses let us beseech, that the Lord may grant to them to receive a reward in patience. For the faithful laymen let us beseech, that the Lord may grant unto them to keep the faith perfectly. For the catechumens let us beseech, that the Lord may grant unto them to be counted worthy of the laver of forgiveness, and may sanctify them with the seal of holiness. For the kingdom let us beseech, that the Lord may bestow upon it tranquillity. For the exalted powers let us beseech, that the Lord may grant to them prudence and the fear of Him. For all the world let us beseech, that the Lord may provide for each one such things as are meet. For those who travel by sea,? and those who go on journeys let us beseech, that the Lord may guide them? with the right hand of mercy. For those who are persecuted let us beseech, that the Lord may grant to them patience and knowledge, and may bestow on them also a completed * labour. For those who have fallen asleep from the Church let us beseech, that the Lord may bestow upon them a place of rest. For those who have fallen® let us beseech, that the Lord may not remember their follies unto them, but moderate [His] threats unto them. And let us all also, who need prayer, beseech that the Lord may protect and keep us with the® peaceful Spirit. Let us persuade and beseech the Lord, that He may receive our prayers. After the deacon commemorateth, let the bishop make a sign with his hand. 1B: perfect faith. 2 Lit.: who sail. 3B. omits: them. 4Or: perfect. 5 Lit.: are in a fall. ®Or: ina. Let the deacon say: Let us arise in the Holy Ghost, that, being made wise, we may grow in His grace, boasting in His Name ; being built on the foundation of the Apostles,’ let us beg [and] beseech the Lord that, being persuaded, He may receive our prayers. Then let the bishop complete [the prayer]. And let the people say: Amen.

## Chapter 36

Let the deacon be such as this, so that he may appear with fear and modesty and reverence. With regard to fervour of spirit,? let him have a perfect manner of life. Let him observe and look at those who come into the house of the sanctuary. Let him investigate who they are, so that he may know if they are lambs or wolves. And when he asketh, let him bring in him that is worthy, lest, if a spy enter, the liberty of the Church be searched out,? and his sin be on his head. If* any one come late to the [service of] praise,> either when that of the dawn® is being said or when the Offering is being offered, whoever he be, let him remain outside, and let not the deacon bring him in,—for it’ is a type of the day of judgment® which is to come,—lest by the noise of the entrance there be distraction to those who are praying. But when he cometh and findeth that the door is shut,’ let him not knock, because of what hath been said already. But after the hymn of praise which is placed first is finished, let the faithful man or faithful woman enter. Let the deacon say, either, Over the offering®: or, For! the xii. 11. that they enter not when the service is going on, but be outside till it endeth. 5§.: service. °8.: the beautiful one (transposition of a letter). hymn of praise, let us beseech that the Lord may write our supplication! in the book of life, and [that] God who [is] for ever may remember us in His holy habitations of light. For? [this] brother who is late, let us beseech that the Lord may give him earnestness and labour, and turn away from him every bond ® of this world, and give him the will of affection and love and * hope. Similarly also® for® a sister or for® a deaconess, for ® those who are’ late or remain® outside, let him admonish ® that all the people may beseech for them. For thus when a deacon mentioneth and admonisheth about them,!° earnestness is strengthened and the bond of love ‘" is fulfilled, and the despiser and the slothful is disciplined.

## Chapter 37

If” any woman whatsoever suffer violence from a man, let the deacon accurately investigate if she be faithful’ and have truly suffered violence; if! he who treated her with violence was not her lover. And if she be accurately thus, and if she that suffered mourn about the violence that happened to her, let him take it up to the hearing of the bishop, that she may be shewn to be in all things in communion with’ the Church. If he who treated her with violence be faithful, let not the deacon bring him into the church for partaking,” even if he repent. But if he be a catechumen and repent, let him be baptized and partake. Let the deacon catechise those who repent and bring them to the presbyters or to the bishop that they may be catechised and taught knowledge. But if [his] power suffice ” to accom1§.: supplications. ? Or: with regard to. 3§.: all the bonds. 4So8S.; M.B.: in. 5§.: either. 6 Or: with regard to. 3S. omits: if she be faithful. ™ So S.; M.B. omit: for partaking. 18 Or : instruct. plish perfectly the office of the diaconate, let him abide only in prayer; and let him consider supplication and meditation, love, the! way, mourning, and [to have] fear before his eyes, as a work; and he shall be called a son of the light.

## Chapter 38

Let the appointment of a deacon be thus. Let the bishop alone lay a hand? on him, because he is not appointed to the priesthood, but for the service of attendance on the bishop and the Church.? Over the deacon then, let the bishop say thus : PRAYER OF ORDINATION* OF A DEACON O God, who didst create all things, and didst adorn [them] by the Word; who dost rest® in the pure ages;® who didst minister to us eternal life by Thy prophets; who didst enlighten us with the light of knowledge; O God, who doest great things,’ and [art] the Maker of all glory’ Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,2 whom Thou didst send to minister to Thy will,!? that all the race of mankind might be saved, and didst make known to us and didst reveal Thy Thought, Thy Wisdom, Thine Energy, Thy beloved Son, Jesus Christ, the Lord of light, the Prince of princes, and God of gods; give the spirit of grace and earnestness to" this Thy servant, that there may be given to him earnestness, quiet, strength, power to please Thee; give him, O Lord, as a worker in the law without shame, kind, a lover of orphans, a lover of the pious, a lover of widows, fervent in spirit, a lover of good things; and 1S.: and the way. Lagarde conjectures: the duty of the way. enlighten, O Lord, him whom Thou hast loved and chosen to minister to Thy Church, offering in holiness to Thy holy place? those things which are offered to Thee from the inheritance of Thy high priesthood; so that ministering without blame and purely and holily and with a pure conscience, he may be counted worthy of this high and exalted office, by Thy good will, praising Thee continually through Thy Only-begotten Son Jesus Christ,3 our Lord, by whom [be] praise and might to Thee for ever and ever. The people: Amen.

## Chapter 39

If [one] be borne witness to and confess that he was in bonds and in imprisonment and in afflictions* for the Name of God, a hand is not therefore laid on him for the diaconate. Similarly not for the presbyterate. For he hath the honour of the clergy,’ having been protected by the hand of God, by [his] confessorship. But if he be appointed bishop, he is also counted worthy of laying on of the hand. And [even] if he be a confessor who hath not been judged before the power, and hath not been buffeted in bonds, but only hath confessed, he is counted worthy of laying on of the hand. For he receiveth the prayer of the clergy. But let him® not pray over him repeating” all these words; but when the shepherd advanceth§ he will receive the effect.

## Chapter 40

Let a widow be appointed,® being chosen, if for a long time past she have abided without a husband ; if though often 1M.: Thou hast enlightened. 2 Or: to Thy sanctity. pressed by men! to be married? because of the faith she have not been married.2 But if not, it is not yet right that she should be chosen; but let her be proved for a time, if she be pious, if having? children she have brought them up * in holiness, if she have not taught them worldly wisdom, if she have made them examples of the holy law and of the Church, if she have loved and honoured strangers, if she have been constant in prayers if she have lived meekly, if she have cheerfully aided those who are afflicted? if it have been revealed to the saints about her, if she have not neglected the saints, if she have ministered? with all her power, if she be fit to bear and endure the burden, being one who prayeth without ceasing,’ being perfect in all things, being fervent in spirit,’ having the eyes of her heart opened in everything, being alway kind, loving innocency, not possessing anything in this world, but alway taking and bearing about the cross, crucifying™ all evil, by night and by day’ abiding by the altar, working cheerfully and secretly. If she have one or two or three likeminded * in my Name, I am among them.“ But let her be perfect in the Lord, as one who is visited by the Spirit. Let her do the things which are made known to her with fear and earnestness. Let her instruct those women who do not obey ; let her teach those * [women] who have not learnt; let her convert those who are foolish; let her instruct them to be grave %; Jet her prove the deaconesses; let her make those who enter!” to know of what sort and who they are; also let her instruct them that they abide. To those who hear’® let her patiently counsel those things which are proper. To those who are disobedient after three instructions let her not speak. Let her love those who desire to be in virginity Pshitta unaltered. 15 Yeminine pronouns throughout. or in purity; those who oppose themselves let her correct modestly and quietly. With every one let her be peaceful. Let her privately shut the mouth of + those who talk much and idly; but if they do not hear, let her take with her an aged woman, or let her take [it] up to the hearing of the bishop. But in the church let her be silent.2. In prayer let her be persistent. Let her visit those [women] who are sick ; on each first day of the week let her take with her one deacon or two and help them? If she have any possession * let her give® it for the poor® and the faithful.? But if she have nothing, let her be helped by thé Church. Let her do no secular work, as it were for a trial. But let her have these works of the Spirit; let her continue in prayers and fasts; let her ask for nothing deep; let her receive those things which the Lord giveth ; let her not be anxious for [her] children °; let her deliver them to the Church, so that they living in the house of God may be fit for the service of the priesthood Her requests to God will be acceptable; they are the sacrifice and altar of God. For those ® who have ministered well shall be praised? by the archangels. But as for them who are dissolute and raging and drunken, and babblers and curious and evil, that is, those who love pleasures much, the figures of their souls, which stand before the Father of light, perish and are carried to darkness to dwell. or their deeds which are visible, going up before the most High, drag them easily ™ to the pit, so that after this world is changed and passeth away the figures of their souls may stand against them as witnesses, not allowing them to look up. For the figure and type of every soul standeth before God from the foundation of the world.” Therefore let her be chosen who can go to meet the holy phials. Of them # are the twelve presbyters who praise My Father who is in heaven. These who receive the prayers of every holy soul, offer [them] to the most High [as] a sweet savour. 1Lit.: muzzle. Cf. St. Matt. xviii. 16. 2 Of. 1 Tim. ii. 12.

## Chapter 41

Let the appointment! be thus. As she prayeth at the entrance of the altar? and looketh down, let the bishop say quietly, so that the priests may hear, thus: PRAYER OF THE INSTITUTION? OF WIDOWS WHO SIT IN FRONT O God, the Holy One, the Most High, who seest the [things]* that are humble,> who hast chosen the weak ® and the mighty ;® the Honoured One who hast created? also ® those [things] which are despised ; give, O Lord, the spirit of power to® this Thine handmaid, and strengthen her with Thy truth, so that doing Thy commandment and serving *° in the house of Thy sanctuary, she may be an honoured vessel " unto Thee, and may glorify !? [Thee] in the day 3 when Thou wilt glorify * Thy poor, O Lord. And* grant to her power cheerfully to accomplish Thy teachings which Thou hast determined for a rule for Thine handmaid. Grant to her, O Lord, the spirit of meekness and of power and of patience and of kindness, so that, bearing with ineffable joy Thy burden, she may endure labours. Yea, O Lord God, who knowest our weakness, perfect Thine handmaid for the praise * of Thine house; strengthen her for edification and a good example,’ sanctify [her], make [her] wise; comfort [her] O God; for blessed and glorious” is Thy kingdom, O God the Father. And to Thee [be] praise, and to Thine Only-begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the® Holy Ghost [who is] good and adorable and the Maker of life,” and of equal essence with Thee,” now 2See above, I. 19 (p. 63) and Note, p. 149. B. has: east (one letter different ; cf. conjecture on p. 149 f.). 3M. has a letter wrong in this word. W Sworo.ds translated (p. 40), 79 duoodoros translated. and before all the worlds and for the ages and for ever and ever.! The people: Amen.

## Chapter 42

After she is [appointed] thus,? let her not be anxious about anything, but let her remain solitary and having leisure for supplications of piety. For the foundation of holiness and life for a widow such as this is solitude For she hath loved none other but the God of gods, the Father which is in heaven. But at fixed* times let her give praise by herself, in the night [and] at dawn. If she be menstruous let her abide 5 in the temple and not approach the altar, not that she is as it were polluted, but that the altar® may have honour. Afterwards, when she fasteth and batheth, let her be assiduous [at the altar]. In the days of Pentecost, let her not fast. In the feast of Pascha, let her give of those things which she hath to the poor, and let her bathe, and so let her pray. But when she giveth thanks or praise, if she have friends’ like-minded virgins, it is well that they pray with her for the sake of the Amen. But if not, [let her pray] alone by herself, both in the church and in the house, especially at midnight. The times in which she should give praise are: Saturday,® the first day of the week, either Pascha or Epiphany or Pentecost.° At other time[s] let her give thanks meekly with psalms, with hymns of praise, with meditations; and thus let her labour. For the Most High will sanctify them™ and will forgive all [their] sins, those which were before written ™ against * them, and their error; My Father, the Heavenly One, shall strengthen them and enlighten their faces as the faces 1 of 1M. adds: Amen. ? B. adds: as has been said. 3.M.; solitary (error). 4 Or: the appointed. (as another form of the word “sin” is fem.). My sanctuaries ;! they shall shine? in My glory in the day of recompense.

## Chapter 43

Let her hymns of praise be said thus quietly : NIGHT HYMN OF PRAISE OF WIDOWS Holy, holy, without spot, who hast Thy dwelling in the light, God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob, God of Enoch and David, of Elijah, of Elisha, of Moses, of Joshua, and of the prophets and of the others who in truth preached Thy Name, God of the Apostles, the God who hast guided all things by Thy reason ° and hast blest them who lovingly trust in Thee; my soul praiseth Thee * with the power of the spirit of my power, my heart praiseth Thee, O Lord, and Thy might, alway. Let all my power praise Thee, O Lord, for if Thou wilt, J am Thine, O God, the God of the poor; for Thou art the Helper of them that lack, and Thou art He that looketh on the meek, and the Assister of the weak; assist me, O Lord, because by Thy grace® Thou wast well pleased in me that I should be Thine handmaid, for Thou hast bestowed upon me a great name, that I should be called a Christian. Thou who hast freed me from servitude that I may serve a servitude to God, the Mighty One who [art] for ever, who seest all, that I may praise Thee uncondemned. Yea, O Lord God, confirm my heart in Thee until it is perfected in the Holy Ghost. Rejuvenate us for the edification of Thy holy Church, Son and Word and Thought of the Father, the Christ who camest for the salvation of the race of man,®° who didst suffer and wast buried, and didst rise, [and] also wast glorified by Him who sent Thee, turn, help, O Lord, set upright our thoughts 7 by the strong faith of the Spirit. Glorify Thy Name in us. 4B. omits this clause (blank space left). For in Thy Father and in Thee and in the Holy Ghost is our hope for ever and ever. With those who are with her let her say: Amen. But let her say the hymn of praise at dawn thus: HYMNS OF PRAISE AT DAWN OF WIDOWS WHO SIT IN FRONT O Eternal God, Guide of our souls, Maker of light, Treasure of life, who restest! in the praises and prayers of the holy ones, Lover of compassion? merciful, kind, King of all, and God, our Lord, my spirit praiseth [Thee], sending [up] to Thee the unceasing voices of Thine handmaid, O Lord, who beseecheth Thee that Thou mayest perfect in Thine handmaid the spirit of reason and of piety and of right knowledge. I praise Thee, O Lord, who didst take away from our poverty all disturbance and confusion (?), wrath and all contention and evil habit, who didst prepare [and] change the feelings of my understanding that I might serve Thee only, O God; who hast adorned Thy holy Church with various ministries, who drivest away from Thine handmaid all doubtfulness, fear, weakness ; and holdest the thoughts of those who rightly serve Thee ; I praise Thee, O God, who hast enlightened me with the light of Thy knowledge, through Thine Only-begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom [be] praise and might to Thee for ever and ever. Amen? And with those who are with her let her say: Amen.

## Chapter 44

Similarly let a subdeacon be appointed ® who is chaste,* the bishop praying over him. Let the bishop say over him on the first day of the week, in the hearing of all the people, thus: 3B. omits: Amen. 4 §rrodtdxovos transliterated. Thou, O N., minister and hear the Gospel in the fear of God. Cultivate? holily the knowledge of thy soul; keep pureness ; discipline thyself; observe and obey and hear meekly ; neglect not prayers and? fasts, so that the Lord may give thee rest and make thee worthy of a higher degree.® And let all the priests say: So be it, so be it, so be it.

## Chapter 45

A reader is instituted + [who is | pure, quiet, meek,’ wise, with much experience, learned and of much learning, with a good memory,® vigilant, so that he may deserve a higher degree? First let the book be given him in the sight of the people, on the first day of the week. Buta hand is not laid on him. But he heareth from the bishop [the following]: Thou, O N., whom Christ hath called to be a minister’? of His words, be careful, and strive that thou mayest appear approved ® both in this rule and in a higher degree, even by our Lord Jesus Christ; so that He in His everlasting habitations may pay thee a good reward for these things. And let the priests say: So be it, so be it, so be it.

## Chapter 46

A male or female virgin is not instituted" or appointed 2 by man,” but is voluntarily separated and named [a virgin]. 2B. omits: and. 4Cf. I. 41, p.108, above. 5 M. omits: meek. 10§.B.; Of virginity ; but S. margin (later hand) has: Of monks. But a hand is not laid on him, as for virginity. For this division! is of [their] own free will. But it is right for virgins? that they be fixed and bound in the suffering of a sound body, that they be constant in fasts and in prayers, in weeping and in mourning daily ; but® that they alway expect a departure from the flesh, and strive as at* the departure. Let them not serve® raging or debauchery or drunkenness or vain talking, or [be engaged] in worldly work or in distraction,’ but they are as one who is on’ the cross; let their hearts be [lifted] up, with all meekness of thought and comeliness, with meditation on the Holy Scriptures, with faithful thoughts’ with kind consolations, so that when they pray they may be answered ® concerning those things which they ask for the faithful who wish to provide for them. Let them not despise 1° [these things (?)], so that through them also a portion of life may be divided to those® Let them be confirmed in love and kindness and in true and _ perfect grace.# Let them be constant in consolation,» consoling their neighbours, catechising '* and teaching those who have lately been made faithful, in! understanding and in knowledge and in kindness, inciting * those who are very young, being examples ! of holiness among them in all good things. Similarly also let the females do. But in order and in grace and in knowledge let them speak and work,” that they may truly be the salt of the earth?! as it is called. But”* let females *8 who are virgins have their heads covered in the church, and let them hide only their hair; but let them be counted worthy 10r: class. 2 Mase. 3B. omits: but. 41B.: expect as it were. 5 Or: cultivate. ® Or: enticement. 8§.: thoughts, faithfulnesses (error of one letter). Ul Lagarde puts a stop after ‘‘ask” and goes on: Let them not despise the faithful who . . ., perhaps rightly. 18§.: let them incite. 19 Lit.: types. 20 Or: visit. So S.; M.: old women; S. marg. adds: The name of male and female virgins in Greek are (sic) not distinguished from one another in diction. of honour from every one, in order that the rest [of the women] who desire, may emulate them.

## Chapter 47

If any one appear in the people to have a gift of healing or of knowledge or of tongues,? a hand is not laid on him, for the work is manifest. But let them have honour.

## Chapter 48

COMMANDMENTS AND RULES AND A DEFINITION’ WHICH OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST LAID DOWN FOR THE ORDER? OF THOSE WHO ARE BAPTIZED® OF LAYMEN THUS: Let those who first come‘ to hear the Word, before they enter among® all the people, first come* to teachers® at home,’ and let them be examined as to all the cause® [of their coming] with all accuracy, so that their teachers may know for what they have come, or with what will, And if they have come with a good will and love, let them be diligently taught. But let those who bring them be such as are well on in years, faithful who are known by the Church; and let them bear witness about them, if they are able to hear [the word]. Also let their life and conversation be asked about: if they be not contentious, if quiet, if meek, not speaking vain things® or despisers or foul speakers,!° or buffoons or leaders astray," or ridicule mongers. Also if Lord Jesus Christ laid down. S. has only extracts from this book, headed : From the Second Book of Clement. any of them have a wife or not; and if of his own free will* he have not [a wife], let him? be instructed* carefully and diligently and persuaded with all kindness to amend his failings. And let the bishop provide for him in the Lord with prophetical instructions which lead him to purity; and if he maketh progress, also with apostolic doctrines® and then with Gospel [doctrines] and with the perfect word of doctrine; and if he be worthy, let him be baptized. And if thus he be worthy of the hidden things, let him hear [them] by himself, and also make progress in that which is hidden. Let there be no obstacle at all to him who desireth to marry, so that he be not caught by the Evil One with fornication. But let him marry a Christian, a faithful [woman] of the race of the Christians, who is able to keep her husband in the faith; at the bidding of the bishop, he thus providing for him. And also let him who cometh’ be asked if he be a slave or free®; and if the slave of one who is faithful, and if also his master permit him, let him hear. But if his master be not faithful and do not permit him, let him be persuaded to permit him. And if [his master] say ® truly about him that he! wisheth ! to become a Christian because he hateth his masters, let him be cast out. But if no cause be shewn of hatred of servitude, but [if] he [really] wish to be a Christian, let him hear. But if his master be faithful and do not bear witness to him, let him be cast out. Similarly if [a woman] be the wife of a man,” let the woman be taught to please her husband in the fear of God. But if both of them desire to serve *® purity in piety, they have “ a reward. word of instruction” in margin (first hand). ? Lit.: this one. 3 Or: made a catechumen (so often). 9S. inserts: accusations ; or: causes. 10 M.B.; and he. 11§,: and sheweth that he wisheth. [There is a misprint in Rahmani’s note. ] Let him who is unmarried! not commit fornication, but let him marry in the law. But if he desire to persevere thus, let him abide? in the Lord. If any one be tormented with a devil, let him not hear the Word from a teacher until he be cleansed. For the intelligence, when consumed? with a material spirit, doth not receive the immaterial* and holy Word. But if he be cleansed, let him be instructed in the Word.

## Chapter 49

If a fornicatress,> or brothel keeper,® or a drunkard, or a maker of idols,’ or a painter, or one engaged in shows,§ or a charioteer,? or a wrestler,’ or one who goeth to the contest," or a combatant [in the games], or one who teacheth wrestling,” or a public huntsman," or a priest of idols, or a keeper of them, be [among those that come], let him not be received. If any such desire to become faithful, let him cease ® from these [things]; and being in deed faithful, and being baptized,’ let him be received and let him partake. And if he do not cease,> let him be rejected. If any one be a teacher of boys in worldly wisdom, it is well if he cease.5 But if he have no other craft” by which to live, let him be excused.18 translated, ‘‘ one (masc.) delighting in fornication.” It occurs again in the Pshitta of Prov. xxix. 8, where the LXX has 8s qoipalver répvas. > =A.C.: r&v érl oxnvijs tes dvhp 7} yur}. » vloxos transliterated. transliterated), labour faithful, etc. (Lagarde, woys). For ‘‘ being baptized” B. reads ‘‘doing” (error of one letter). If any one be a soldier or in authority, let him be taught not to oppress or to kill or to rob, or to be angry or to rage and afflict any one. But let those rations? suffice him which are given to him. But if they wish to be baptized in the Lord, let them cease? from military service® or from the [post of] authority, and if not let them not be received. Let a catechumen or a believer of the people, if he desire to be a soldier, either cease from his intention,‘ or if not let him be rejected. For he hath despised God by his thought, and leaving the things of the Spirit, he hath perfected himself in the flesh, and hath treated the faith with contempt. If a fornicatress or a dissolute man or a drunkard do not ® [these things], and desire, believing, to become catechumens,’ they may [be admitted]. And if they make progress, let them be baptized ; but if not let them be rejected. If a concubine of a man®& be a servant, and desire to be faithful, if she educate those who are born [of her] and she separate from her master, or be joined’?® to him alone in marriage, let her hear; and being baptized let her partake in the Offering, but if not let her be rejected. He who doeth things which may not be spoken of,” or a diviner or a magician ® or a necromancer, these are defiled and do not come to judgment. Let a charmer,’ or an astrologer, or an interpreter of dreams, or a sorcerer, or one who gathereth together the people, or a star-gazer, or a diviner by idols, either cease,? and when he ceaseth let him be exorcised and baptized ; or if not let him be rejected. If a man® have a concubine, let him divorce her and marry in the law and hear the word of instruction.1” Pshitta.

## Chapter 50

Let him who is instructed! with all care and heareth the perfectness? of the Gospel, be instructed not less than three years, and if he, loving, strive to be baptized, let him [then] be baptized. : But if he be quiet and meek and earnest, and persevering and abiding with him who teacheth him, with labour, with watching, with confession,! with subjection, and with prayers, and [if] he desire to be baptized sooner, let him be baptized. For it is not the time that is considered,® but the will of faith.”

## Chapter 51

Let those who are instructed, after the teacher ceaseth, pray apart from the faithful and go out, so that the faithful may learn,’ when the presbyter or deacon readeth the New [Testament] or Gospels.® Let the faithful women stand in the church by themselves and the female catechumens by themselves apart from the faithful [women]. But all the [women] apart from the men; the girls also apart, each according to her order. The men on the right and the women on the left; the faithful virgins ! first, and the [women] who are being instructed to virginity behind them. After the prayer let the female catechumens give the Peace to one another; also men" to men; also women to women. Let every woman ™ cover her head with her hair also. Let the women becomingly and decorously show their modesty in their adornment, and let them not be adorned with plaited hair ® or with [precious] stones, lest the young men who are in the church be caught, but with modesty and knowledge. But Nl Viri. 12 Married women ? 131 Tim. ii. 9. if not, let them be instructed by the widows who sit in front. But if they rebelliously resist, let the bishop reprove them.

## Chapter 52

After the catechumens pray, let the bishop or presbyter, laying on them a hand, say the prayer of the laying on of the hand of catechumens : PRAYER OF CATECHUMENS O God, who dost send thunderings and preparest lightnings , who hast founded the heaven and established! the earth, and enlightenest the faithful and convertest them that err; who hast quickened those who were dead and hast given hope to those who [were] without hope, and hast freed the universe from error by the coming down of Thy Only-begotten Son Jesus Christ ; hear us, O Lord,? and give to these souls intelligence, perfectness, undoubting faith, knowledge of the truth, that they may be in a degree higher than this, through the holy Name of Thee and of Thy beloved Son Jesus, our Lord, through whom [be] praise and might to Thee with the Holy Ghost, both now and alway and for ever and ever. Amen. After this let them be dismissed. If any one, being a catechumen, be apprehended for My Name and be judged with tortures, and hasten and press forward to receive the laver, let not the shepherd hesitate, but let him give [it] to him. But if he suffer violence and be killed, not having received the laver, let him not be anxious.. For, having been baptized in his own blood, [he is] justified*

## Chapter 53

But if they are severally chosen to receive‘ the laver, let them be proved and investigated first,> how they have lived while catechumens,’ if they have honoured widows, if they have visited the sick, if they have walked ? in all meekness and love,” if they were earnest in good works. But let them be borne witness to by those who bring them. And when they hear the Gospel, let a hand be laid on them daily. Let them be exorcised from that day when they are chosen. And let them be baptized in the days of Pascha. And when the days approach, let the bishop exorcise each one of them separately by himself, so that he may be persuaded that he is pure. For if there be one that is not pure, or in whom is an unclean spirit, let him be reproved * by that unclean ® spirit. If then any one is found under any such imagination,® let him be removed from the midst [of them], and let him be reproved and reproached that he hath not heard the word of the commandments and of instruction faithfully, because the evil and strange spirit abided in him. Let those who are about to receive the laver be taught on the fifth day of the last week only, to wash and bathe’ their heads. But if any woman then ® be in the customary flux, let her also take in addition another day, washing and bathing beforehand.® Let them fast both [on] the Friday and [on] the Saturday.

## Chapter 54

On the Saturday let the bishop assemble them who receive the laver, and let him bid them to kneel while the deacon proclaimeth.° And when there is silence let him exorcise [them], laying a hand on them, and saying: EXORCISM BEFORE THE LAVER O God of heaven, God of the lights," God of the arch1 Or: being instructed. 2 Eph. v. 2. 8 Tit. ii, 14, angels who are under Thy power, God of the angels who are under Thy might, King of glories and of dominions,’ God of saints, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ ;* who hast loosed the souls that were bound by‘ death; who hast enlightened him that was bound in darkness and fixed firm, by the firm-fixing ® of the suffering of Thy Only-begotten ; who hast loosed our cords and hast loosed every weight from [off] us; who hast repelled from us every attack® of the Evil One; O Son and Word of God, who hast made us immortal by Thy death ; who hast glorified us with Thy glory; who hast loosed all the bands of our sins by Thy passion; who hast borne the curse of our sins by Thy cross, and by Thy resurrection hast taught [mankind] to pass from [being] sons of men to become gods; who hast taken on Thee our humiliation’; who hast trodden the way to heaven for us; who hast changed us from corruption to incorruptibility §; hear me, O Lord, who cry to Thee in pain and fear,O Lord God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,? before Him before whom stand the holy hosts of archangels and of cherubim and armies without number, of princes and of seraphim ; whose veil [is] the light, and before whose face ™ [is] fire; the throne of whose glory is ineffable ; the habitations of whose delights, which Thou hast prepared for Thy saints, are ineffable, the raiments and treasures of which are visible to Thee alone and to Thy holy angels; before whom all things tremble, giving praise!?; whose glance measureth the mountains, and whose Name, when uttered, cleaveth the depths; whom the heavens which are shut up by Thy hand, hide from view ; before whom the earth and the depths together tremble; before whom the sea and 1Col. i. 16. 2 Not Rev. xv. 3 (Syr. as R.V.). same root as in II. 24, below. between ‘‘ that which is not in a state of corruption,” and ‘ incorruptibility.” the dragons that [are] in it quake; of whom the wild beasts? trembling, stand in awe; through whom the mountains and the firmament? of the earth melt with fear; at whose power the tempest of the winter quaketh and trembleth, and the raging whirlwind keepeth its limits; because of whom the fire of vengeance doth not overpass that which hath been prescribed to it, but abideth when reproved by Thy commandment; because of whom the whole creation travaileth, groaning ° with groans, being bidden to tarry till its time; from whom all nature and creation that opposeth itself fleeth; because of whom the whole army of the adversary is subdued, and the Devil is fallen, and the serpent is trodden down, and ,the dragon is killed; because of whom the nations which have confessed Thee are enlightened‘ and strengthened in Thee, O Lord; because of whom life is revealed and hope confirmed, and faith strengthened and the Gospel® preached; because of whom corruption is brought to naught and incorruptibility waxeth strong; through whom man °® was fashioned from the earth, but having believed in Thee he is no longer” earth; O Lord God Almighty, I exorcise these in the Name of Thee and of Thy beloved Son Jesus Christ. Drive away from the souls of these Thy servants every disease and illness, and every stumbling block and all unbelief, all doubt and all contempt,’ every unclean spirit that worketh,? that is a witch, that killeth, that is under the earth, that is fiery, dark, evil-smelling, given to witchcraft, lascivious, loving gold, uplifted, money loving, wrathful. Yea, O Lord God,!? overthrow from these Thy servants who have been named in Thee the weapons of the Devil, all magic, witchcraft, fear of idols, divination, astrology,” necromancy, observation of the stars, astronomy,” pleasure of the 4Lit.: shine; or: burn. 5 Lit.: annunciation. passions, love of disgraceful things, sadness, love of money, drunkenness, fornication, adultery, lasciviousness, contumacy, contentiousness, wrath, confusion, wickedness, evil suspicion.' Yea, O Lord God, hear me, and breathe on these Thy servants the spirit of tranquillity, that, being guarded by Thee, they may bring forth in Thee fruits of faith, of virtue, of wisdom, of purity, of self-discipline? of patience, of hope, of concord, of modesty,’ of praise. For by® Thee they have been called as servants, in the Name of Jesus Christ, being baptized in the Trinity, in the Name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, the angels, glories, dominions, all the heavenly army being witnesses. O Lord, the real-essence® of our life and theirs, guard their hearts, O God, for Thou art mighty and glorious’ for ever and ever. And let all the people, also the priests, say: Amen, So be it, If any one be in the endurance of any thing, rise suddenly while the bishop is saying [these words], and weep or cry out, or foam [at the mouth] or gnash with his teeth, or stare’ or be much uplifted or altogether run away, being quickly carried off, let such an one be put aside® by the deacons, so that there be no disturbance while the bishop is speaking, and let such an one be exorcised by the priests until he be cleansed, and so let him be baptized. After the priest exorciseth those who have drawn near, or him who is found unclean, let the priest breathe on them and seal them between their eyes,!° on the nose, on the heart, on the ears; and so let him raise them up.

## Chapter 55

In the forty days of Pascha, let the people abide in the 10r: expectation. ? Or: asceticism. 5 dudvo.e translated. temple, keeping vigil and praying, hearing the Scriptures and hymns of praise and the books? of doctrine. But? on the last Saturday let them rise early 4 in he night, and ® when the catechumens are being exorcised till the Saturday midnight.© Let those who are about to be baptized not bring anything else with them except one loaf for the Eucharist.’ But let them be baptized thus. When they come to the water, let the water be pure and flowing. First the babes, then the men, then the women. But if any one desire to approach as it were to virginity, let him ° first be baptized by the hand of the bishop. Let the women, when they are baptized, loose their hair. Let all the boys who can answer in baptism make the responses ® and answer after the priest. But if they cannot, let their parents make the responses for them, or some one of their households.?° But when they who are being baptized go down [to the water], after they make the responses and say [the answers], let the bishop see if! there be any of them—either a man having a ring of gold, or a woman having on her gold; for no one should have with him any strange thing in the water, but let him deliver it to those who are near him.” But when they are about to receive the oil for anointing, let the bishop pray over it and give thanks, and let him exorcise another [oil] with an exorcism, the same as in the case of catechumens. And let the deacon bear that which is exorcised, and let the presbyter stand by him. Let him then who standeth by that [oil] on which a giving of thanks over * the oil [is said] be on the right hand; but him who standeth by that which is exorcised, on the left. 3S. resumes here, prefixing the words ‘‘ And after a little.” And when he taketh hold of each one, let him ask—he that is being baptized turning to the West—and let him say: Say, I renounce thee, Satan, and all thy service, and thy shows? and thy pleasures? and all thy works. And when he hath said these things and confessed, let him be anointed with that oil which was exorcised, he who anointeth him saying thus: I anoint [thee] with this oil of exorcism for a deliverance from every evil and unclean spirit, and for a deliverance from every evil. And also, turning him* to the Hast, let him® say: [Say,*] I submit’ to Thee, Father and ® Son and® Holy Ghost, before whom all nature trembleth and is moved. Grant me to do all Thy will® without blame. Then after these things let him give him over to the presbyter who baptizeth. And let them stand in the water naked. But let the deacon descend with him similarly. But when he who is being baptized goeth down into the water, let him that baptizeth him say, putting his hand on him, thus: Dost thou believe in God the Father Almighty? Let him that is being baptized say: T believe. Let him immediately baptize him once. Let the priest also say: Dost thou believe also in Christ Jesus the Son of God, who came from the Father, who is of old with the Father, who was born of Mary the Virgin by the Holy Ghost, who was crucified in the days of Pontius Pilate, and died and rose the third day,!° [who] came to life from the dead, and ascended into heaven and sat down on the right hand of the Father, and cometh to judge the quick and the dead? But when he saith: I believe, let him baptize him the second time. And also let him say: Dost thou believe also in the Holy Ghost, in the holy Church? And let him who is being baptized say: I believe; and thus let him baptize him the third time. Then when he cometh up let him be anointed by the presbyter with oil over which the giving of thanks has been said, 1Lit.: military service. ? Lit.: theatres. [the presbyter] saying over him: I anoint thee with oil in the Name of Jesus Christ. But let women be anointed by widows who sit in front, the presbyter saying over them [the words]. And let those widows in baptism also beneath a veil receive them by a veil, the bishop saying those Confessions, and so those? whom they: cause them to renounce.”

## Chapter 56

Then let then be together in the Church, and let the bishop lay a hand on them after baptism, saying and invoking over them thus: INVOCATION OF THE HOLY GHOST O Lord God, who by Thy beloved Son Jesus Christ didst fill Thy holy apostles with the Holy Ghost, and by the Spirit didst permit Thy blessed prophets to speak; who didst count these Thy servants worthy to be counted worthy in Thy Christ * of forgiveness of sins through the laver of the second birth,t and hast cleansed them of all the mist of error and darkness of unbelief; make them worthy to be filled with Thy Holy Spirit, by Thy love of man,> bestowing upon them Thy grace, so that they may serve Thee according to Thy will, truly, O God, and may do Thy commandments in holiness, and cultivating alway those things which are of Thy will, may enter into Thine eternal tabernacles, through Thee and through Thy beloved Son Jesus Christ, by whom [be] to Thee praise and might with the Holy Ghost for ever and ever. Similarly, pouring the oil, placing a hand on his head, let him say: Anointing I anoint [thee] in God Almighty, and in Jesus Christ and in the Holy Ghost, that thou mayest be His ® soldier,’ having a perfect faith, and a vessel pleasing to Him. certain that the MSS. are wrong. 4Lit.: birth again. Tit. iii, 5. 5 @davOpwrrla translated. And sealing him on his forehead, let him give him the Peace, and say: The Lord God of the meek be with thee. And let him who has been sealed answer and say: And with thy spirit. And so each one severally.

## Chapter 57

Thenceforward let them pray together with all the people. Let the oblation be offered by the deacon. And so let the shepherd give thanks. But the bread is offered for a type of My body. Let the cup be mixed with wine-—mixed with wine and water, for it is a sign? of blood and of the laver?; so that also the inner man, that is to say, that which is of the soul, may be counted worthy of those things which are like [them],* that is to say,> those things of the body also. And ® let all the people, according to what hath been said before, receive with Amen of the Eucharist’ which is offered. Let the deacons hover over [them], as hath before been said.® Let him who giveth [the sacrament] say: The Body of Jesus Christ, the Holy Ghost, for the healing of soul and body. And let him who receweth say: Amen. He who spilleth ° of the cup gathereth up judgment to himself. Similarly also he who seeth and is silent and doth not reprove him, whoever he may be. Let those who take the Offering be exhorted by the priests to be careful to do good works, to love strangers," to labour in fasting, and in every good work to engage” in servitude. And let them be taught also about the resurrection of the body *; before any one receiveth baptism let no one know the? word about the 68.: of (error). 7 evyapioria transliterated. W Lit.: poureth forth. 1 Heb. xiii. 2. resurrection, for this is the new decree, which hath a new name that none knoweth but he who receiveth [it]. The deacon doth not give the Offering to a presbyter. Let him open the disc! or paten,? and let the presbyter receive. Let the deacon give [the Eucharist] to the people in their hands. Let * the deacon, when the presbyter is not present, of necessity baptize.

## Chapter 58

If any one receive any service® to carry to a widow or poor woman or any one constantly engaged in a Church work, let him give it® the same day; and if not, on the morrow, let him add something to it® from his own [property] and so give it. For the bread of the poor hath been kept back in his possession. But in the last week of Pascha, on the fifth day of the week, let the bread and the cup be offered. And he who suffered for that which he hath offered, he [it is] who draweth near. Let the lamp be offered’ in the temple by the deacon, saying ®: The grace of our® Lord [be] with you all. And let all the people say: And with Thy spirit. And let the little boys say spiritual psalms and hymns of praise by the light of the lamp.’° Let all the people respond Hallelujah to the psalm and to the chant sung together, with one accord, with voices in harmony; and let no one kneel until he who speaketh cease. Similarly also when a lection is read or the word of doctrine is spoken. If then the Name of the Lord his [the deacon’s] hand. But this hardly makes sense. 4B. omits from here to ‘‘ possession ” in II. 11. lamp. be spoken, and the rest, as hath sufficiently been made known, let no one bow, having come creeping in.!

## Chapter 59

Let the end? of Pascha be after the Saturday, at midnight. [At] Pentecost let no one fast or kneel. For these are days of rest and joy. Let those who bear the burdens of labour refresh? themselves a little in the days of Pentecost, and on every first day of the week. Let the bishop, before he offereth the Offering,* say what is fitting for the Offering, while those who are clothed in white receive from one another and say [to one another] Hallelujah.

## Chapter 60

In the supper or feast, let those who have come together ® receive [a portion ?] thus from the shepherd, as for a blessing. But let not a catechumen receive. If any one be of the household of, or related to, one who is a teacher of heathenism,’ let him not accord with® him and give praise with him, also let him not eat with him because of relationship or for concord, lest he deliver ineffable things to a wolf ® and he receive judgment. Let those who are called with the bishop to the house of one who is faithful, eat with gravity and knowledge, not with drunkenness or to debauchery,!® and not so that he who is present may laugh, or so as to annoy the household" of him 5M. omits: to (error). 7 Lit.: other things. that called him; but so let them enter that he who called [them] may pray that the saints may enter into his house, For ye are the salt of the earth,) [as] ye have heard. Because? when they eat, let them eat abundantly, [but] so that there may be left over both for you [and] also for those to whom he that called you wisheth [to] send, so that he may have them? as foods‘ left over® by the saints, and that he may rejoice at that which remaineth over. Let ® those who come to a feast, being called, not stretch out” a hand before them that are elder. But let the last eat ® when ® the first shall have done. Let not those who eat strive !° in speech, but let them eat in silence; but if any one desire, or the bishop or presbyter ask [a question], let him return answer. But when the bishop saith a word," let every one quietly, praising [him], choose silence for himself, until he also ™ be asked [a question].

## Chapter 61

If any one bring forward * fruits or the first produce of crops as first fruits, let him offer [them] to the bishop.1®

## Chapter 62

If any one depart from the world, either a faithful man or a faithful woman, having children, let them give their 1St. Matt. v. 18. 2 Sic, text. bishop.” Lagarde thus punctuates, perhaps rightly : ef 71s kaprods . . . motel, Tas dwapyas mpoodepérw TH éemioKbTry. possessions to the Church, so that the Church may provide for their children, and [that] from the things which they have the poor may be given rest, that God may give mercy to their children and rest to those who have left [them] behind. But if a man? have no children, let him have not much possessions, but let him give much of his possessions to the poor and to the prisoners? and only keep* what is right and sufficient for him[self]. If a man? have children,’ and he desire to discipline himself in virginity, let him give all his possessions to the poor, and discipline himself * and abide in the church, being constant in prayers and thanksgivings.’

## Chapter 63

The fruits which are offered ® to the bishop let him bless thus: O God, we give thanks to Thee alway, and also in this day when we offer to Thee the first fruits of the fruits which Thou hast given us for food, having ripened® them by Thy power and by Thy Word, having commanded from the beginning of the creation’? of the worlds that the earth should bring forth different fruits for the joy and delight of man? and of all beasts.2 We praise Thee, O Lord, for all these things with which Thou hast benefited us, adorning for us all the earth with various fruits. Bless also this Thy servant N., and receive his earnestness and his love, through Thine Only-begotten Son Jesus Christ, through whom [be] praise and honour and might to Thee with the Holy Ghost for ever and ever. Amen. 1§8.: fallen asleep. 2 Homo, Vegetables are not blessed, but fruits of trees, flowers, and the rose and the lily.

## Chapter 64

Let them give and return thanks and not eat with offence or scandal. Let no one taste that which is strangled or sacrificed to idols.”

## Chapter 65

On the days of Pascha, especially in the last days, on Friday and on Saturday, by night and by day, let the prayers be according to the number of the hymns of praise. But let the word be interpreted at length,? and let the lections [be] various and continuous. And let the vigils and anticipations of the night be in good order.®

## Chapter 66

Let the readers assist them. Similarly also the subdeacons. Let them not allow them to sleep.’ For that night is a figure of the kingdom, and especially that of the Saturday. Those who labour and work, let them work § till midnight. Let the catechumens first be dismissed, having received blessings ® from the bread which is broken. 1B.: flower. 2 Of. Acts xv. 29. 3 Lit.: thick ; or: well filled. When the faithful are dismissed, let them go in order’ and knowledge to their houses. In their feasts? let them not forget the prayers. Let the priests not abbreviate their ministrations. Let the women go, each one cleaving to her husband. Let the widows stay till dawn in the temple, having food there. Let the virgins? abide together in the temple, and let the bishop help and provide for them, and let the deacons minister to them.* Let the presbyteresses stay with the bishop till dawn, praying and resting. Similarly also those who were lately baptized. Let virgins? who are ready for marriage go, cleaving to their mothers. This is thus fitting.

## Chapter 67

Let the bishop command that they proclaim ® that no one taste anything until the Offering is completed. And the whole body of the Church shall receive a new food. Then in the evening” let those who are to be® baptized be baptized, after one lection. But if any one before he approacheth and receiveth of the Eucharist ® eat something else, he sinneth and his fast is not reckoned to him. When the catechumens are dismissed, let a hand be laid on them. If a faithful because of sickness remain [away], let the deacon carry the Offering to him. If any one be a presbyter who cannot come, let a presbyter carry [it] to him. Similarly if a woman be pregnant [and] sick, and cannot fast these two days, let her fast that ?° one day," taking on the +B, mase. (error), 5 Here S, resumes. ® Or: preach. first [day] bread and water. And if she cannot come, let a deaconess carry [the Offering] to her.

## Chapter 68

Let them take [it] up to the hearing of the bishop, so that if it seem good? to the bishop he may visit them; for the sick [man] is much comforted when the high priest remembereth him, and 3 especially when he is faithful.‘

## Chapter 69

In answer to him who singeth the psalms in the church, - let the virgins® and boys respond and sing. But if they sing the psalms in a house privately, if they be two or three, let them respond to one another, singing the psalms. Similarly the men.

## Chapter 70

If a poor man die, let those who provide for each one, provide for his clothing. If any one who is a stranger die and he have no place to be buried, let those who havea place give [it]. But if the Church hath [a place] let it give [it], And if he have no covering, let the Church similarly give it. But if he have not grave clothes, let him be shrouded. But if a man be found to have possessions, and do not leave them to the Church, let them be kept for.a time; and after a year let not the Church appropriate them, but let them be given to the poor for his soul. But if he desire ® to be embalmed, let the deacons provide for this, a presbyter standing by. If the Church have a graveyard, and there be one who abideth there and keepeth it, let the bishop provide for him from the Church, so that he be no burden to those who come there.

## Chapter 71

Let the people alway take care about the early dawn, that arising and washing their hands they immediately pray. And so let each one go to the work which he willeth. Let all take care to pray at the third hour with mourning and labour, either in the church, or in the house because they cannot go (to the church). For this is the hour of the fixing + of the Only-begotten on the cross. But at the sixth hour similarly let there be prayer with sorrow. For then the daylight was divided by the darkness. Let there be then that voice which is like to the prophets, and to creation mourning. At the ninth hour also let prayer be protracted, as with a hymn of praise that is like to the souls of those who give praise to God that lieth not, as one who hath remembered His saints, and hath sent His Word and Wisdom to enlighten them. For in that hour life was opened to the faithful, and blood and water were shed from the side of our Lord. But at evening, when it is the beginning of another day, shewing an image of the resurrection, He hath caused us to give praise. But at midnight let them arise praising? and lauding? because of the resurrection. But at dawn [let them arise] praising * with psalms, because after He rose He glorified the Father while they ‘ were singing psalms. But if any have a consort ® or wife [not] faithful, let the husband who is faithful go and pray at these times without fail.! Let those who are chaste not lessen [them]. For the adornments of heaven give praise, the lights, the sun, the moon, the stars, the lightnings, the thunders, the clouds, the angels, the archangels, the glories, the dominions, the whole [heavenly] army, the depths, the sea, the rivers, the wells, fire, dew, and all nature that produceth rain. All the saints also give praise and all the souls of the righteous.2 These, then,? who pray are numbered together in the remembrance of God.

## Chapter 72

When ye the faithful accomplish these things, teach and instruct one another, causing the catechumens to make progress, as loving all men‘; ye do not® perish, but will be in Me and I will be among you.® But alway let the faithful take care that before he eat he partake of the Eucharist,’ that he may be incapable of receiving injury. When ye teach these things and keep [them], ye shall be saved, and evil heresy ® shall not prevail against you. Lo, then, I have taught you now all [things] that ye desire; and those things® which I have spoken with you [of] from the beginning, and have taught and commanded you before I should suffer, ye know.

## Chapter 73

And thou ” especially John, and Andrew and Peter, even now ye know all [the things] which I have spoken to you while I am with you, as also that which [is] in this Testament, in order that when ye deliver [them] to the nations the will of My Father may alway be accomplished, abiding’ firm in carefulness, so that there may be good fruits in them that hear. Ye know that I have spoken with you that a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit.2 All [things], then, that I have commanded you openly and secretly, do. And the God of tranquillity be with you.’

## Chapter 74

And falling down we worshipped Him, saying, Glory to Thee, O Jesus, Name of light, who didst give us the teaching of Thy commandments, so that we may be like unto Thee, we and all those who hear Thee. And when He spoke to us and taught and commanded us, and showed many loosings® and miracles, He was taken up from us, giving us tranquillity.® John and Peter and Matthew wrote this Testament, and sent [it] in copies from Jerusalem by Dositheus’? and Silas and Magnus and Aquila, whom they chose to send [them] to all dioceses. Amen.

# Book of the Covenant 2

## Chapter 1

The book which Jesus Christ revealed unto his disciples: and how that Jesus Christ revealed the book for the company (college) of the apostles, the disciples of Jesus Christ, even the book which is for all men. Simon and Cerinthus, the false apostles, concerning whom it is written that no man shall cleave unto them, for there is in them deceit wherewith they bring men to destruction. (The book hath been written) that ye may be steadfast and not flinch nor be troubled, and depart not from the word of the Gospel which ye have heard. Like as we heard it, we keep it in remembrance and have written it for the whole world. We commend you our sons and our daughters in joy <to the grace of God(?)> in the name of God the Father the Lord of the world, and of Jesus Christ. Let grace be multiplied upon you.

## Chapter 2

We, John, Thomas, Peter, Andrew, James, Philip, Bartholo¬ mew, Matthew, Nathanael, Judas Zelotes, and Cephas, write unto the churches of the east and the west, of the north and the south, declaring and imparting unto you that which concerneth our Lord Jesus Christ: we do write according as we have seen and heard and touched him, after that he was risen from the dead: and how that he revealed unto us things mighty and wonderful and true.

## Chapter 3

This know we: that our Lord and Redeemer Jesus Christ is God the Son of God, who was sent of God 1 the Lord of the whole world, the maker and creator of it, who is named by all names, and high above all powers, Lord of lords, King of kings, Ruler of rulers, the heavenly one, that sitteth above the cherubim and seraphim at the right hand of the throne of the Father: who by his word made the heavens, and formed the earth and that which is in it, and set bounds to the sea that it should not pass: the deeps also and fountains, that they should spring forth and flow over the earth: the day and the night, the sun and the moon, did he establish, and the stars in the heaven: that did separate the light from the darkness: that called forth hell, and in the twinkling of an eye ordained the rain of the winter, the snow (cloud), the hail, and the ice, and the days in their several seasons: that maketh the earth to quake and again establisheth it: that created man in his own image, after his likeness, and by the fathers of old and the prophets is it declared (or, and spake in parables with the fathers of old and the prophets in verity), of whom the apostles preached, and whom the disciples did touch. In God, the Lord, the Son of God, do we believe, that he is the word become flesh: that of Mary the holy virgin he took a body, begotten of the Holy Ghost, not of the will (lust) of the flesh, but by the will of God: that he was wrapped in swaddling clothes in Bethlehem and made manifest, and grew up and came to ripe age, when also we beheld it.

## Chapter 4

This did our Lord Jesus Christ, who was sent by Joseph and Mary his mother to be taught. [And] when he that taught him said unto him: Say Alpha: then answered he and said: Tell thou me first what is Beta (probably : Tell thou me first what is <Alpha and then will I tell thee what is> Beta. Cf. the Marcosian story quoted by Irenaeus (see above, Gospel of Thomas, p. 15). The story is in our texts of the Gospel of Thomas, and runs through all the Infancy Gospels). This thing which then came to pass is true and of verity. 1 Of the clauses that follow, some it seems should refer to the Father, others certainly to the Son: there is confusion in the text.

## Chapter 5

Thereafter was there a marriage in Cana of Galilee; and they bade him with his mother and his brethren, and he changed water into wine. He raised the dead, he caused the lame to walk: him whose hand was withered he caused to stretch it out, and the woman which had suffered an issue of blood twelve years touched the hem of his garment and was healed in the same hour.* And when we marvelled at the miracle which was done, he said: Who touched me ? Then said we: Lord, the press of men hath touched thee. But he answered and said unto us: I perceive that a virtue is gone out of me. Straightway that woman came before him, and answered and said unto him: Lord, I touched thee. And he answered and said unto her: Go, thy faith hath made thee whole. Thereafter he made the deaf to hear and the blind to see; out of them that were possessed he cast out the unclean spirits, and cleansed the lepers. The spirit which dwelt in a man, whereof the name was Legion, cried out against Jesus, saying: Before the time of our destruction is come, thou art come to drive us out. But the Lord Jesus rebuked him, saying: Go out of this man and do him no hurt. And he entered into the swine and drowned them in the water and they were choked. Thereafter he did walk upon the sea, and the winds blew, and he cried out against them (rebuked them), and the waves of the sea were made calm. And when we his disciples had no money, we asked him: What shall we do because of the tax-gatherer? And he answered and told us: Let one of you cast an hook into the deep, and take out a fish, and he shall find therein a penny: that give unto the tax-gatherer for me and you. And thereafter when we had no bread, but only five loaves and two fishes, he commanded the people to sit them down, and the number of them was five thousand, besides children and women. We did set pieces of bread before them, and they ate and were filled, and there remained over, and we filled twelve baskets full of the fragments, asking one another and saying: What mean these five loaves ? They are the symbol of our faith in the Lord of the Christians (in the great Christendom), even in the Father, the Lord Almighty, and in Jesus Christ our redeemer, in the Holy Ghost the comforter, in the holy church, and in the remission of sins.

## Chapter 6

These things did our Lord and Saviour reveal unto us and teach us. And we do even as he, that ye may become partakers in the grace of our Lord and in our ministry and our giving of thanks (glory), and think upon life eternal. Be ye steadfast and waver not in the knowledge and confidence of our Lord Jesus Christ, and he will have mercy on you and save you everlastingly, world without end. Here begins the Coptic text

## Chapter 7

Cerinthus and Simon are come to go to and fro in the world, but they are enemies of our Lord Jesus Christ, for they do pervert the word and the true thing, even (faith in) Jesus Christ. Keep yourselves therefore far from them, for death is in them, and great pollution and corruption, even in these on whom shall come judgement and the end and everlasting destruction.

## Chapter 8

Therefore have we not shrunk from writing unto you con¬ cerning the testimony of Christ our Saviour, of what he did, when we followed with him, how he enlightened our understanding . . .

## Chapter 9

Concerning whom we testify that the Lord is he who was crucified by Pontius Pilate and Archelaus between the two thieves (and with them he was taken down from the tree of the cross, Eth.), and was buried in a place which is called the place of a skull (Kranion). And thither went three women, Mary, she that was kin to Martha, and Mary Magdalene (Sarrha, Martha, and Mary, Eth,), and took ointments to pour upon the body, weeping and mourning over that which was come to pass. And when they drew near to the sepulchre, they looked in and found not the body {Eth, they found the stone rolled away and opened the entrance).

## Chapter 10

And as they mourned and wept, the Lord showed himself unto them and said to them: For whom weep ye ? weep no more, I am he whom ye seek. But let one of you go to your brethren and say: Come ye, the Master is risen from the dead. Martha (Mary, Eth,) came and told us. We said unto her: What have we to do with thee, woman? He that is dead and buried, is it possible that he should live ? And we believed her not that the Saviour was risen from the dead. Then she returned unto the Lord and said unto him: None of them hath believed me, that thou livest. He said: Let another of you go unto them and tell them again. Mary (Sarrha, Eth.) came and told us again, and we believed her not; and she returned unto the Lord and she also told him.

## Chapter 11

Then said the Lord unto Mary and her sisters: Let us go unto them. And he came and found us within (sitting veiled or fishing, Eth,), and called us out; but we thought that it was a phantom and believed not that it was the Lord. Then said he unto us: Come, fear ye not. I am your master, even he, O Peter, whom thou didst deny thrice; and dost thou now deny again? And we came unto him, doubting in our hearts whether it were he. Then said he unto us: Wherefore doubt ye still, and are unbelieving ? I am he that spake unto you of my flesh and my death and my resurrection. But that ye may know that I am he, do thou, Peter, put thy finger into the print of the nails in mine hands, and thou also, Thomas, put thy finger into the wound of the spear in my side; but thou, Andrew, look on my feet and see whether they press the earth; for it is written in the prophet: 1 A phantom of a devil maketh no footprint on the earth. 1 Not identified. The Christian poet Commodian appears to quote this passage : Vestigium umbra non facit.

## Chapter 12

And we touched him, that we might learn 1 of a truth whether he were risen in the flesh; and we fell on our faces (and worshipped him) confessing our sin, that we had been unbelieving. Then said our Lord and Saviour unto us: Rise up, and I will reveal unto you that which is above the heaven and in the heaven, and your rest which is in the kingdom of heaven. For my Father hath given me power (sent me, Eth.) to take you up thither, and them also that believe on me.

## Chapter 13

Now that which he revealed unto us is this, which he spake: It came to pass when I was about (minded) to come hither from the Father of all things, and passed through the heavens, then did I put on the wisdom of the Father, and I put on the power of his might. I was in heaven, and I passed by the archangels and the angels in their likeness, like as if I were one of them, among the princedoms and powers. I passed through them because I possessed the wisdom of him that had sent me. Now the chief captain of the angels, [is] Michael, and Gabriel and Uriel and Raphael followed me unto the fifth firmament (heaven), for they thought in their heart that I was one of them; such power was given me of my Father. And on that day did I adorn the archangels with a wonderful voice (so Copt .; Eth., Lat ., I made them quake—amazed them), so that they should go unto the altar of the Father and serve and fulfil the ministry until I should return unto him. And so wrought I the likeness by my wisdom; for I became all things in all, that I might praise the dispensation of the Father and fulfil the glory of him that sent me ( the verbs might well be transposed) and return unto him. (Here the Latin omits a considerable portion of text without notice , to near the beginning of c. 17.)

## Chapter 14

For ye know that the angel Gabriel brought the message unto Mary. And we answered: Yea, Lord. He answered and said unto us: Remember ye not, then, that I said unto you a little while ago: I became an angel among the angels, and I became all things in all ? We said unto him: Yea, Lord. Then answered he and said unto us: On that day whereon I took the form of the angel Gabriel, I appeared unto Mary and spake with her. Her heart accepted me, and she believed (She believed and laughed, Eth.), and I formed myself and entered into her body. I became flesh, for I alone was a minister unto myself in that which concerned Mary (I was mine own messenger, Eth.) in the appearance of the shape of an angel. For so must I needs (or, was I wont to) do. Thereafter did I return to my Father (Copt. After my return to the Father, and run on).

## Chapter 15

But do ye commemorate my death. Now when the Passover (Easter, pascha) cometh, one of you shall be cast into prison for my name's sake; and he will be in grief and sorrow, because ye keep the Easter while he is in prison and separated from you, for 1 Here begins the Latin fragment. he will be sorrowful because he keepeth not Easter with you. And I will send my power in the form of mine angel Gabriel, and the doors of the prison shall open. And he shall come forth and come unto you and keep the night-watch with you until the cock crow. And when ye have accomplished the memorial which is made of me, and the Agape (love-feast), he shall again be cast into prison for a testimony, until he shall come out thence and preach that which I have delivered unto you. And we said unto him: Lord, is it then needful that we should again take the cup and drink? (Lord, didst not thou thyself fulfil the drinking of the Passover? is it then needful that we should accomplish it again? Eth.) He said unto us: Yea, it is needful, until the day when I come again, with them that have been put to death for my sake (come with my wounds, Eth.).

## Chapter 16

Then said we to him: Lord, that which thou hast revealed unto us (revealest, Eth.) is great. Wilt thou come in the power of any creature or in an appearance of any kind? (In what power or form wilt thou come? Eth.) He answered and said unto us: Verily I say unto you, I shall come like the sun when it is risen, and my brightness will be seven times the brightness thereof I 1 The wings of the clouds shall bear me in brightness, and the sign of the cross shall go before me, and I shall come upon earth to judge the quick and the dead.

## Chapter 17

We said unto him: Lord, after how many years shall this come to pass ? He said unto us: 2 When the hundredth part and the twentieth part is fulfilled, between the Pentecost and the feast of unleavened bread, then shall the coming of my Father be (so Copt.: When an hundred and fifty years are past, in the days of the feast of Passover and Pentecost, &c., Eth.: . . . ( imperfect word) year is fulfilled, between the unleavened bread and Pentecost shall be the coming of my Father, Lat.).* We said unto him: Now sayest thou unto us: I will come; and how sayest thou: He that sent me is he that shall come? Then said he to us: I am wholly in the Father and my Father is in me. 4 Then said we to him: Wilt thou indeed forsake us until thy coming ? Where can we 5 find a master ? But he answered and said unto us: Know ye not, then, that like as until now I have been here, so also was I there, with him that sent me? And we said to him: Lord, is it then possible that thou shouldest be both here and there? But he answered us: I am wholly in 1 Probably from the Apocalypse of Peter. * Here the Latin fragment resumes. • Before the word ‘year’ in Lat. are the letters inta which may he the end of a numeral such as quinquaginta (fifty). It seems Jikely that in the archetype of the Latin one or more leaves were wanting. 4 Here Coptic omits several clauses by homoeoteleuton. Ethiopic and Latin are followed. 6 Here Latin ends. the Father and the Father in me, 1 because of (in regard of) the likeness of the form and the power and the fullness and the light and the full measure and the voice. I am the word, I am become unto him a thing, that is to say (word gone) of the thought, fulfilled in the type (likeness); I have come into the Ogdoad (eighth number), which is the Lord’s day. 2 (In place of these sentences Eth. has : I am of his resemblance and form, of his power and completeness, and of his light. I am his complete (fulfilled, entire) Word.

## Chapter 18

But it came to pass after he was crucified, and dead and arisen again, when the work was fulfilled which was accomplished in the flesh, and he was crucified and the ascension come to pass at the end of the days, then said he thus, &c. It is an interpolation , in place of words which the translator did not understand , or found heretical .) But the whole fulfilment of the fulfilment shall ye see after the redemption which hath come to pass by me, and ye shall see me, how I go up unto my Father which is in heaven. But behold, now, I give unto you a new commandment: Love one another and [a leaf lost in Copt.] obey one another, that peace may rule alway among you. Love your enemies, and what ye would not that man do unto you, that do unto no man.

## Chapter 19

And this preach ye also and teach them that believe on me, and preach the kingdom of heaven of my Father, and how my Father hath given me the power, that ye may bring near the children of my heavenly Father. Preach ye, and they shall obtain faith, that ye may be they for whom it is ordained that they shall bring his children unto heaven. And we said unto him: Lord, unto thee it is possible to accomplish that whereof thou tellest us; but how shall we be able to do it ? He said to us: Verily I say unto you, preach and proclaim as I command you , for I will be with you, for it is my good pleasure to be with you, that ye may be heirs with me in the kingdom of heaven, even the kingdom of him that sent me. Verily I say unto you, ye shall be my brethren and my friends, for my Father hath found pleasure in you: and so also shall they be that believe on me by your means. Verily I say unto you, such and so great joy hath my Father prepared for you that the angels and the powers desired and do desire to see it and look upon it; but it is not given unto them to behold the glory of my Father. We said unto him: Lord, what is this whereof thou speakest to us ? Copt, begins again : words are missing. He answered us: Ye shall behold a light, more excellent than that which shineth ... (shineth more brightly than the light, and is more perfect than perfection. And the Son shall become perfect 1 Coptic resumes. • The Lord’s day considered as the eighth day of the week. through the Father who is Light, for the Father is perfect which bringeth to pass death and resurrection, and ye shall see a per¬ fection more perfect than the perfect. And I am wholly at the right hand of the Father, even in him that maketh perfect. So Eth.: Copt, has gaps). And we said unto him: Lord, in all things art thou become salvation and life unto us, for that thou makest known such a hope unto us. And he said to us: Be of good courage and rest in me. Verily I say unto you, your rest shall be above (?), in the place where is neither eating nor drinking, nor care (Copt, joy) nor sorrow, nor passing away of them that are therein : for ye shall have no part in (the things of earth, Eth.) but ye shall be received in the everlastingness of my Father. Like as I am in him, so shall ye also be in me. Again we said unto him: In what form? in the fashion of angels* or in flesh ? And he answered and said unto us: Lo, I have put on your flesh, wherein I was born and crucified, and am risen again through my Father which is in heaven, that the prophecy of David the prophet might be fulfilled, in regard of that which was declared concerning me and my death and resurrection, saying: Lord, they are increased that fight with me, and many are they that are risen up against me. Many there be that say to my soul: There is no help for him in his God. But thou, O Lord, art my defender: thou art my worship, and the lifter up of my head. I did call upon the Lord with my voice and he heard me (out of the high place of his temple, Eth.). I laid me down and slept, and rose up again : for thou, O Lord, art my defender. I will not be afraid for ten thousands of the people, that have set themselves against me round about. Up, Lord, and help me, O my God: for thou hast smitten down all them that without cause are mine enemies: thou hast broken the teeth of the ungodly. Salvation belongeth unto the Lord, and his good pleasure is upon his people (Ps. iii. 1-8). If, therefore, all the words which were spoken by the prophets have been fulfilled in me (for I myself was in them), how much more shall that which I say unto you come to pass indeed, that he which sent me may be glorified by you and by them that believe on me ?

## Chapter 20

And when he had said this unto us, we said to him: In all things hast thou had mercy on us and saved us, and hast revealed all things unto us; but yet would we ask of thee somewhat if thou give us leave. And he said unto us: I know that ye pay heed, and that your heart is well-pleased when ye hear me: now concerning that which ye desire, I will speak good words unto you.

## Chapter 21

For verily I say unto you: Like as my Father hath raised me from the dead, so shall ye also rise (in the flesh, Eth.) and be taken up into the highest heaven, unto the place whereof I have told you from the beginning, unto the place which he who sent me hath prepared for you. And so will I accomplish all dispensations (all grace, Eth.), even I who am unbegotten and yet begotten of mankind, who am without flesh and yet have borne flesh <and have grown up like unto you that were born in flesh, Eth.): for to that end am I come, that (gap in Copt.: Eth. continues) ye might rise from the dead in your flesh, in the second birth, even a vesture that shall not decay, together with all them that hope and believe in him that sent me: for so is the will of my Father, that I should give unto you, and unto them whom it pleaseth me, the hope of the kingdom. Then said we unto him: Great is that which thou sufferest us to hope, and tellest us. And he answered and said: Believe ye that everything that I tell you shall come to pass ? We answered and said: Yea, Lord. (Copt, resumes for a few lines : then another gap. 1 follow Eth.) He said unto us: Verily I say unto you, that I have obtained the whole power of my Father, that I may bring back into light them that dwell in darkness, them that are in corruption into incorruption, them that are in death into life, and that I may loose them that are in fetters. For that which is impossible with men, is possible with the Father. I am the hope of them that despair, the helper of them that have no saviour, the wealth of the poor, the health of the sick, and the resurrection of the dead.

## Chapter 22

When he had thus said, we said unto him: Lord, is it true that the flesh shall be judged together with the soul and the spirit, and that the one part shall rest in heaven and the other part be punished everlastingly yet living? And he said unto us: (Copt, resumes) How long will ye inquire and doubt?

## Chapter 23

Again we said unto him: Lord, there is necessity upon us to inquire qf thee—because thou hast commanded us to preach— that we ourselves may learn assuredly of thee and be profitable preachers, and that they which are instructed by us may believe in thee. Therefore must we needs inquire of thee.

## Chapter 24

He answered us and said: Verily I say unto you, the resurrection of the flesh shall come to pass with the soul therein and the spirit. And we said unto him: Lord, is it then possible that that which is dissolved and brought to nought should become whole? and we ask thee not as unbelieving, neither as if it were impossible unto thee; but verily we believe that that which thou sayest shall come to pass. And he was wroth with us and said: O ye of little faith, how long will ye ask questions ? But what ye will, tell it me, and I myself will tell you without grudging: only keep ye my commandments and do that which I bid you, and turn not away vour face from any man, that I turn not my face away from you, but without shrinking and fear and without respect of persons, minister ye in the way that is direct and narrow and strait. So shall my Father himself rejoice over you.

## Chapter 25

Again we said unto him: Lord, already are we ashamed that we question thee oft-times and burden thee. And he an¬ swered and said unto us: I know that in faith and with your whole heart ye do question me; therefore do I rejoice over you, for verily I say unto you: I rejoice, and my Father that is in me, because ye question me; and your importunity (shamelessness) is unto me rejoicing and unto you it giveth life. And when he had so said unto us, we were glad that we had questioned him, and we said to him: Lord, in all things thou makest us alive and hast mercy on us. Wilt thou now declare unto us that which we shall ask thee ? Then said he unto us: Is it the flesh that passeth away, or is it the spirit ? We said unto him: The flesh is it that passeth away. Then said he unto us: That which hath fallen shall rise again, and that which was lost shall be found, and that which was weak shall recover, that in these things that are so created the glory of my Father may be revealed. As he hath done unto me, so will I do unto all that believe in me.

## Chapter 26

Verily I say unto you: the flesh shall arise, and the soul, alive, that their defence may come to pass on that day in regard of that that they have done, whether it be good or evil: that there may be a choosing-out of the faithful who have kept the com¬ mandments of my Father that sent me; and so shall the judge¬ ment be accomplished with strictness. For my Father said unto me: My Son, in the day of judgement thou shalt have no respect for the rich, neither pity for the poor, but according to the sins of every man shalt thou deliver him unto everlasting torment. But unto my beloved that have done the commandments of my Father that sent me will I give the rest of life in the kingdom of my Father which is in heaven, and they shall behold that which he hath given me. And he hath given me authority to do that which I will, and to give that which I have promised and deter¬ mined to give and grant unto them.

## Chapter 27

For to that end went I down unto the place of Lazarus, and preached unto the righteous and the prophets, that they might come out of the rest which is below and come up into that which is above; and I poured out upon them with my right hand the water (?) (baptism, Eth.) of life and forgiveness and salvation from all evil, as I have done unto you and unto them that believe on me. But if any man believe on me and do not my command¬ ments, although he have confessed my name, he hath no profit therefrom but runneth a vain race: for such will find themselves in perdition and destruction, because they have despised my commandments.

## Chapter 28

But so much the more have I redeemed you, the children of light, from all evil and from the authority of the rulers (archons). and every one that believeth on me by your means. For that which I have promised unto you will I give unto them also, that they may come out of the prison-house and the fetters of the rulers. We answered and said: Lord, thou hast given unto us the rest of life and hast given us <joy ?> by wonders, unto the con¬ firmation of faith: wilt thou now preach the same unto us, seeing that thou hast preached it unto the <righteous> and the prophets? Then said he unto us: Verily I say unto you, all that have believed on me and that believe in him that sent me will I take up into the heaven, unto the place which my Father hath prepared for the elect, and I will give you the kingdom, the chosen kingdom , in rest, and everlasting life.

## Chapter 29

But all they that have offended against my commandments and have taught other doctrine, (perverting) the Scripture and adding thereto, striving after their own glory, and that teach with other words them that believe on me in uprightness, if they make them fall thereby, shall receive everlasting punishment. We said unto him : Lord, shall there then be teaching by others, diverse from that which thou hast spoken unto us ? He said unto us : It must needs be, that the evil and the good may be made manifest; and the judgement shall be manifest upon them that do these things, and according to their works shall they be judged and shall be delivered unto death.. Again we said unto him: Lord, blessed are we in that we see thee and hear thee declaring such things, for our eyes have beheld these great wonders that thou hast done. He answered and said unto us: Yea, rather blessed are they that have not seen and yet have believed, for they shall be called children of the kingdom, and they shall be perfect among the perfect, and I will be unto them life in the kingdom of my Father. Again we said unto him: Lord, how shall men be able to believe that thou wilt depart and leave us; for thou sayest unto us: There shall come a day and an hour when I shall ascend unto^my Father ?

## Chapter 30

But he said unto us: Go ye and preach unto the twelve tribes, and preach also unto the heathen, and to all the land of Israel from the east to the west and from the south unto the north, and many shall believe on <me> the Son of God. But we said unto him: Lord, who will believe us, or hearken unto us, or (how shall we be able, Eth .) to teach the powers and signs and wonders which thou hast done? Then answered he and said to us: Go ye and preach the mercifulness of my Father, and that which he hath done through me will I myself do through you, for I am in you, and I will give you my peace, and I will give you a power of my spirit, that ye may prophesy to them unto life eternal. And unto the others also will I give my power, that they may teach the residue of the peoples. (Six leaves lost in Copt .; Eth . continues.)

## Chapter 31

And behold a man shall meet you, whose name is Saul, which being interpreted is Paul: he is a Jew, circumcised accord¬ ing to the Taw, and he shall receive my voice from heaven with fear and terror and trembling. And his eyes shall be blinded, and by your hands by the sign of the cross shall they be protected (healed: other Eth. MSS . with spittle by your hands shall his eyes. &c.). Do ye unto him all that I have done unto you. Deliver it (? the word of God) unto the other. And at the "same time that man shall open his eyes and praise the Lord, even my Father which is in heaven. He shall obtain power among the people and shall preach and instruct; and many that hear him shall obtain glory and be redeemed. But thereafter shall men be wroth with him and deliver him into the hands of his enemies, and he shall bear witness before kings that are mortal, and his end shall be that he shall turn unto me, whereas he persecuted me at the first . He shall preach and teach and abide with the elect, as a chosen vessel and a wall that shall not be overthrown, yea , the last of the last shall become a preacher unto the Gentiles, made perfect by the will of my Father. Like as ye have learned from the Scripture that your fathers the prophets spake of me, and in me it is indeed fulfilled. And he said unto us: Be ye also therefore guides unto them; and all things that I said unto you, and that ye write concerning me (tell ye them), that I am the word of the Father and that the Father is in me. Such also shall ye be unto that man, as becometh you. Instruct him and bring to his mind that which is spoken of me in the Scripture and is fulfilled, and thereafter shall he become the salvation of the Gentiles.

## Chapter 32

And we asked him: Lord, is there for us and for them the self-same expectation of the inheritance ? He answered and said unto us: Are then the fingers of the hand like unto each other, or the ears of corn in the field, or do all fruit-trees bear the same fruit? Doth not every one bear fruit according to its nature? And we said unto him: Lord, wilt thou again speak unto us in parables? Then said he unto us: Lament not. Verily I say unto you, ye are my brethren, and my companions in the kingdom of heaven unto my Father, for so is his good pleasure. Verily I say unto you, unto them also whom ye teach and who believe on me will I give that expectation.

## Chapter 33

And we asked him again: When shall we meet with that man, and when wilt thou depart unto thy Father and our God and Lord? He answered and said unto us: That man will come out of the land of Cilicia unto Damascus of Syria, to root up the church which ye must found there. It is I that speak through you; and he shall come quickly: and he shall become strong in the faith, that the word of the prophet may be fulfilled, which saith: Behold, out of Syria will I begin to call together a new Jerusalem, and Sion will I subdue unto me, and it shall be taken. and the place which is childless shall be called the son and daughter of my Father, and my bride. For so hath it pleased him that sent me. But that man will I turn back, that he accomplish not his evil desire, and the praise of my Father shall be perfected in him, and after that I am gone home and abide with my Father, I will speak unto him from heaven, and all things shall be accomplished which I have told you before con¬ cerning him.

## Chapter 34

And we said unto him again: Lord, so many great things hast thou told us and revealed unto us as never yet were spoken, and in all hast thou given us rest and been gracious unto us. After thy resurrection thou didst reveal unto us all things that we might be saved indeed; but thou saidst unto us only: There shall be wonders and strange appearances in heaven and on earth before the end of the world come. Tell us now, how shall we perceive it ? And he answered us: I will teach it you; and not that which shall befall you only, but them also whom ye shall teach and who shall believe, as well as them who shall hear that man and believe on me. In those years and days shall it come to pass. And we said again unto him: Lord, what shall come to pass ? And he said unto us: 1 Then shall they that believe and they that believe not hear (see, Eth.) a trumpet in the heaven, a vision of great stars which shall be seen in the day, wonderful sights in heaven reaching down to the earth; stars which fall upon the earth like fire, and a great and mighty hail of fire (a star shining from the east unto this place, like unto fire, Eth. 2). The sun and the moon fighting one with the other, a continual rolling and noise of thunders and lightnings, thunder and earthquake; cities falling and men perishing in their overthrow, a continual dearth for lack of rain, a terrible pestilence and great mortality, mighty and untimely, so that they that die lack burial: and the bearing forth of brethren and sisters and kinsfolk shall be upon one bier. The kinsman shall show no favour to his kinsman, nor any man to his neighbour. And they that were overthrown shall rise up and behold them that overthrew them, that they lack burial, for the pestilence shall be full of hatred and pain and envy: and men shall take from one and give to another. And thereafter shall it wax yet worse than before. (Bewail ye them that have not hearkened unto my commandments, Eth. 2.)

## Chapter 35

Then shall my Father be wroth at the wickedness of men, for many are their transgressions, and the abomination of their uncleanness weigheth heavy upon them in the corruption of their life. And we asked him: What of them that trust in thee ? He answered and said unto us : Ye are yet slow of heart; and how long ? Verily I say unto you, as the prophet David spake of me 1 Here begins the parallel text in the prophecy ( Testament in Galilee) which is prefixed, in the Ethiopic version, to the Epistle: see above. b?o K k and of my people, so shall it be (?) for them also that believe on me. But they that are deceivers in the world and enemies of righteous¬ ness, upon them shall come the fulfilment of the prophecy of David, who said : Their feet are swift to shed blood, their tongue uttereth slander, adders’ poison is under their lips. I behold thee companying with thieves, and partaking with adulterers, thou continuest speaking against thy brother and puttest stumblingblocks before thine own mother’s son. What thinkest thou, that I shall be like unto thee ? Behold now how the prophet of God hath spoken of all, that all things may be fulfilled which he said aforetime.

## Chapter 36

And again we said unto him: Lord, will not then the nations say: Where is their God? And he answered and said unto us: Thereby shall the elect be known, that they, being plagued with such afflictions, come forth. We said: Will then their departure out of the world be by a pestilence which giveth them pain? He answered us: Nay, but if they suffer such affliction, it will be a proving of them, whether they have faith and remember these my sayings, and fulfil my command¬ ments. These shall arise, and short will be their expectation, that he may be glorified that sent me, and I with him. For he hath sent me unto you to tell you these things; and that ye may impart them unto Israel and the Gentiles and they may hear, and they also be redeemed and believe on me and escape the woe of the destruction. But whoso escapeth from the destruction of death, him will they take and hold him fast in the prison-house in torments like the torments of a thief. And we said unto him: Lord, will they that believe be treated like the unbelievers, and wilt thou punish them that have escaped from the pestilence ? And he said unto us: If they that believe in my name deal like the sinners, then have they done as though they had not believed. And we said again to him: Lord, have they on whom this lot hath fallen no life? He answered and said unto us: Whoso hath accomplished the praise of my Father, he shall abide in the resting-place of my Father.

## Chapter 37

Then said we unto him: Lord, teach us what shall come to pass thereafter ? And he answered us: In those years and days shall war be kindled upon war ; 1 the four ends of the earth shall be in commotion and fight against each other. Thereafter shall be quakings of clouds (or, clouds of locusts), darkness, and dearth, and persecutions of them that believe on me and against the elect. Thereupon shall come doubt and strife and transgressions against one another. And there shall be many that believe on my name and yet follow after evil and spread vain doctrine. And men shall follow after them and their riches, and be subject unto their pride, and lust for drink, and bribery, and there shall be respect of persons among them. 1 Fragments of a leaf in Coptic exist for this passage.

## Chapter 38

But they that desire to behold the face of God and respect not the persons of the rich sinners, and are not ashamed before the people that lead them astray, but rebuke (?) them, they shall be crowned by the Father. And they also shall be saved that rebuke their neighbours, for they are sons of wisdom and of faith. But if they become not children of wisdom, whoso hateth his brother and persecuteth him and showeth him no favour, him will God despise and reject. (Copt, resumes .) But they that walk in truth and in the knowledge of the faith, and have love towards me—for they have endured insult—they shall be praised for that they walk in poverty and endure them that hate them and put them to shame. Men have stripped them naked, for they despised them because they continued in hunger and thirst, but after they have endured patiently, they shall have the blessedness of heaven, and they shall be with me for ever. But woe unto them that walk in pride and boasting, fd their end is perdition.

## Chapter 39

And we said unto him: Lord, is this thy purpose , that thou leavest us, to come upon them? (Will all this come to pass, Eth.) He answered and said unto us: After what manner shall the judgement be? whether righteous or unrighteous? (In Copt, and Eth. the general sense is the same: but the answer of Jesus in the form of a question is odd, and there is probably a corruption.) We said unto him: Lord, in that day they will say unto thee: Thou hast not distinguished between ( probably: will they pot say unto thee: Thou hast distinguished between) righteousness and unrighteousness, between the light and the darkness, and evil and good? Then said he: I will answer them and say: Unto Adam was power given to choose one of the two: he chose the light and laid his hand thereon, but the darkness he left behind him and cast away from him. Therefore have all men power to believe in the light which is life, and which is the Father that hath sent me. And every one that believeth and doeth the works of the light shall live in them ; but if there be any that confesseth that he belongeth unto the light, and doeth the works of darkness, such an one hath no defence to utter, neither can he lift up his face to look upon the Son of God, which Son am I. For I will say unto him: As thou soughtest, so hast thou found, and as thou askedst, so hast thou received. 'Wherefore condemnest thou me, O man ? Wherefore hast thou departed from me and denied me ? And wherefore hast thou confessed me and yet denied me? hath not every man power to live and to die? Whoso then hath kept my commandments shall be a son of the light, that is, of the Father that is in me. But because of them that corrupt my words am I come down from heaven. I am the word: I became flesh, and I wearied myself (or, suffered) and taught, saying : The heavy laden shall be saved, and they that are gone astray shall go astray for ever. They shall be chastised and tormented in their flesh and in their soul.

## Chapter 40

And we said unto him: O Lord, verily we are sorrowful for their sake. And he said unto us: Ye do rightly, for the righteous are sorry for the sinners, and pray for them, making prayer unto my Father. Again we said unto him: Lord, is there none that maketh intercession unto thee (so Eth .)? And he said unto us: Yea, and I will hearken unto the prayer of the righteous which they make for them. When he had so said unto us, we said to him: Lord, in all things hast thou taught us and had mercy on us and saved us, that we might preach unto them that are worthy to be saved, and that we might obtain a recompense with thee. (Shall we be partakers of a recompense from thee? Eth.)

## Chapter 41

He answered and said unto us: Go and preach, and ye shall be labourers, and fathers, and ministers. We said unto him: Thou art he (or, Art thou he) that shalt preach by us. (Lord, thou art our father. Eth.) Then answered he us, saying: Be not (or, Are not ye) all fathers or all masters. (Are then all fathers, or all servants, or all masters? Eth.) We said unto him: Lord, thou art he that saidst unto us: Call no man your father upon earth, for one is your Father, which is in heaven, and your master. Wherefore sayest thou now unto us: Ye shall be fathers of many children, and servants and masters? He answered and said unto us: According as ye have said (Ye have rightly said, Eth.). For verily I say unto you: whosoever shall hear you and believe on me, shall receive of you the light of the seal through me, and baptism through me: ye shall be fathers and servants and masters.

## Chapter 42

But we said unto him: Lord, how may it be that every one of us should be these three? He said unto us: Verily I say unto you: Ye shall be called fathers, because with praiseworthy heart and in love ye have revealed unto them the things of the kingdom of heaven. And ye shall be called servants, because they shall receive the baptism of life and the remission of their sins at my hand through you. And ye shall be called masters, because ye have given them the word without grudging, and have admonished them, and when ye admonished them, they turned themselves (were converted). Ye were not afraid of their riches, nor ashamed before their face, but ye kept the command¬ ments of my Father and fulfilled them. And ye shall have a great reward with my Father which is in heaven, and they shall have forgiveness of sins and everlasting life, and be partakers in the kingdom of heaven. And we said unto him: Lord, even if every one of us had ten thousand tongues to speak withal, we could not thank thee, for that thou promisest such things unto us. Then answered he us, saying: Only do ye that which I say unto you, even as I myself also have done it.

## Chapter 43

And ye shall be like the wise virgins which watched and slept not, but went forth unto the lord into the bridechamber : but the foolish virgins were not able to watch, but slumbered. And we said unto him: Lord, who are the wise and who are the foolish ? He said unto us: Five wise and five foolish; for these are they of whom the prophet hath spoken: Sons of God are they. Hear now their names. But we wept and were troubled for them that slumbered. He said unto us: The five wise are Faith and Love and Grace and Peace and Hope. Now they of the faithful which possess this (these) shall be guides unto them that have believed on me and on him that sent me. For I am the Lord and I am the bridegroom whom they have received, and they have entered in to the house of the bridegroom and are laid down with me in the bridal chamber rejoicing. But the five foolish, when they had slept and had awaked, came unto the door of the bridal chamber and knocked, for the doors were shut. Then did they weep and lament that no man opened unto them. We said unto him: Lord, and their wise sisters that were within in the bridegroom’s house, did they continue without opening unto them, and did they not sorrow for their sakes nor entreat the bridegroom to open unto them? He answered us, saying: They were not yet able to obtain favour for them. We said unto him: Lord, on what day shall they enter in for their sisters’ sake? Then said he unto us: He that is shut out, is shut out. And we said unto him: Lord, is this word (deter¬ mined?). Who then are the foolish? He said unto us: Hear their names. They are Knowledge, Understanding (Perception), Obedience, Patience, and Compassion. These are they that slumbered in them that have believed and confessed me but have not fulfilled my commandments.

## Chapter 44

On account of them that have slumbered, they shall remain outside the kingdom and the fold of the shepherd and his sheep. But whoso shall abide outside the sheepfold, him will the wolves devour, and he shall be (condemned?) and die in much affliction: in him shall be no rest nor endurance, and (Eth.) although he be hardly punished, and rent in pieces and devoured in long and evil torment, yet shall he not be able to obtain death quickly.

## Chapter 45

And we said unto him: Lord, well hast thou revealed all this unto us. Then answered he us, saying: Understand ye not (or, Ye understand not) these words? We said unto him: Yea, Lord. By five shall men enter into thy kingdom <and by five shall men remain without): notwithstanding, they that watched were with thee the Lord and bridegroom, even though they rejoiced not because of them that slumbered (yet will they have no pleasure, because of, Eth,), He said unto us: They will indeed rejoice that they have entered in with the bridegroom, the Lord; and they are sorrowful because of them that slum¬ bered, for they are their sisters. For all ten are daughters of God, even the Father. Then said we unto him: Lord, is it then for thee to show them favour on account of their sisters ? (It becometh thy majesty to show them favour, Eth.) He said unto us: <It is not mine,) but his that sent me, and I am consenting with him (It is not yours, &c., Eth.).

## Chapter 46

But be ye upright and preach rightly and teach, and be not abashed by any man and fear not any man, and especially the rich, for they do not my commandments, but boast them¬ selves (swell) in their riches. And we said unto him: Lord, tell us if it be the rich only. He answered, saying unto us: If any man who is not rich and possesseth a small livelihood giveth unto the poor and needy, men will call him a benefactor.

## Chapter 47

But if any man fall under the load <because> of sin that he hath committed, then shall his neighbour correct him because of the good that he hath done unto his neighbour. And if his neighbour correct him and he return, he shall be saved, and he that corrected him shall receive a reward and live for ever. For a needy man, if he see him that hath done him good sin, and correct him not, shall be judged with severe judgement. Now if a blind man lead a blind, they both fall into a ditch: and whoso respecteth persons for their sake, shall be as the two <blind>, as the prophet hath said: Woe unto them that respect persons and justify the ungodly for reward, even they whose God is their belly. Behold that judgement shall be their portion. For verily I say unto you: On that day will I neither have respect unto the rich nor pity for the poor.

## Chapter 48

If thou behold a sinner, admonish him betwixt him and thee: (if he hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother, Eth.) and if he hear thee not, then take to thee another, as many as three, and instruct thy brother: again, If he hear thee not, let him be unto thee (Copt, defective from this point.) as an heathen man or a publican.

## Chapter 49

If thou hear aught against thy brother, give it no credence; slander not, and delight not in hearing slander. For thus it is written: Suffer not thine ear to receive aught against thy brother: but if thou seest aught, correct him, rebuke him, and convert him. And we said unto him: Lord, thou hast in all things taught us and warned us. But, Lord, concerning the believers, even them to whom it belongeth to believe in the preaching of thy name: is it determined that among them also there shall be doubt and division, jealousy, confusion, hatred, and envy? For thou sayest: They shall find fault with one another and respect the person of them that sin, and hate them that rebuke them. And he answered and said unto us: How then shall the judgement come about, that the corn should be gathered into the garner and the chaff thereof cast into the fire ?

## Chapter 50

They that hate such things, and love me and rebuke them that fulfil not my commandments, shall be hated and persecuted and despised and mocked. Men will of purpose speak of them that which is not true, and will band themselves together against them that love me. But these will rebuke them, that they may be saved. But them that will rebuke and chasten and warn them, them will they (the others) hate, and thrust them aside, and despise them, and hold themselves far from them that wish them good. But they that endure such things shall be like unto the martyrs with the Father, because they have striven for righteousness, and have not striven for corruption. And we asked him: Lord, shall such things be among us? And he answered us: Fear not; it shall not be in many, but in a few. We said unto him: Yet tell us, in what manner it shall come to pass. And he said unto us: There shall come forth another doctrine, and a confusion, and because they shall strive after their own advancement, they shall bring forth an unprofit¬ able doctrine. And therein shall be a deadly corruption (of uncleanness), and they shall teach it, and shall turn away them that believe on me from my commandments and cut them off from eternal life. But woe unto them that falsify this my word and commandment, and draw away them that hearken to them from the life of the doctrine and separate themselves frcrn the commandment of life: for together with them they shall come into everlasting judgement.

## Chapter 51

And when he had said this, and had finished his discourse with us, he said unto us again: Behold, on the third day and at the third hour shall he come which hath sent me, that I may depart with him. And as he so spake, there was thunder and lightning and an earthquake, and the heavens parted asunder, and there appeared a light (bright) cloud which bore him up. And there came voices of many angels, rejoicing and singing praises and saying: Gather us, O Priest, unto the light of the majesty. And when they drew nigh unto the firmament, we heard his voice saying unto us: Depart hence in peace.
